Environment Law
Overview of Environment Law
Environmental law is a body of law that addresses issues concerning the
environment, natural resources, and land use. The earliest legal remedies available
to address environmental problems were found under the common law doctrines of
trespass and nuisance. While these doctrines are still valid, their effectiveness has
been limited by the “right to farm” laws now enacted in all fifty states. Please see the
Urban Encroachment Reading Room for more information on “right to farm”
laws.Congress began promulgating specific statutory protections for the
environment in 1899 with the Rivers and Harbors Act, which provided a regulatory
mechanism to limit pollution in the nation’s navigable waters. Modern environmental
law began developing in the 1950s with the enactment of statutes such as the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (now referred to as the Clean Water Act (CWA))
and the Clean Air Act (CAA).Biotechnology is a developing area of law that continues
to impact environmental issues. Biotechnology, or genetic engineering (GE), is the
“genetic modification of organisms by recombinant DNA techniques.”
The products resulting from GE techniques are often referred to as genetically
modified organisms (GMOs). Because the federal policy has taken the position that
biotechnology itself has no inherent dangers, products developed with such
technology are regulated under existing laws in the same manner as nonbiotechnology products. Three federal agencies have oversight over GE products:
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), the Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service (APHIS), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).Under this regulatory structure, APHIS is
responsible for ensuring that agriculture is protected from pests and diseases. APHIS
regulates GE crops under the Plant Protection Act (PPA).
PPA provides the authority for APHIS to regulate GE crops as “biological control
organisms” and de-regulate organisms that meet federal testing and safety
requirements. The EPA regulates biopesticides, plants whose DNA has chemical
properties and protections such as Round-Up Ready Corn and Soybeans. The EPA
has the authority to regulate biopesticides under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide,
and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
(FDCA), the FDA generally has authority over labeling foods containing GE
components. Until 2016, there were no mandatory labeling requirements for foods
containing GE components because such foods were deemed to be as safe as their
traditional counterparts.In 2016, Congress passed the National Bioengineered Food
Disclosure Standard, which establishes a mandatory labeling requirement for all
foods falling within the definition of bioengineered food. The USDA has the authority
to promulgate the rules and regulations implementing this law. For more information,
see the Biotechnology Reading Room.
Environmental laws affecting agriculture have rapidly developed over the past sixty
years and cover a broad spectrum of issues– from pesticide use to erosion control,
from water quality, quantity, and use to particulate contamination of the air we
breathe. Due to the wide range of environmental statutes and regulations, many of
the topics covered in this reading room are also addressed in other places on this
site. To find more detailed information on specific statutes, follow the links to the
additional Reading Rooms provided below.
d International Environmental Agreements
Profound environmental changes caused by the increasing scale of human activity
have led many observers to conclude that the planet has entered the
“Anthropocene”—a geologic era signified by human impact on the biosphere.
International environmental law is the set of agreements and principles that reflect
the world's collective effort to manage our transition to the Anthropocene
by resolving our most serious environmental problems, including climate change,
ozone depletion and mass extinction of wildlife. More generally, international
environmental law aims to achieve sustainable development—i.e., development that
allows people to have a high quality of life today without sacrificing the quality of life
of future generations. International environmental law is thus critical both for
addressing specific environmental threats and for integrating long-term
environmental protection into the global economy.
But not all environmental threats trigger international (as opposed to solely national
or local) response. For countries to sacrifice their autonomy, some advantage must
be gained in addressing the problem collectively. Typically, countries turn to
international cooperation where (l) the environmental impacts are transboundary
(such as pollution into the Great Lakes) or global (such as climate change); (2) some
international activity contributes to environmental harm, for example, the international
trade in elephant ivory or the killing of whales; or (3) international coordination of
financial or technical support can catalyze action (for example, for the global
conservation of biological diversity). In these circumstances, international
cooperation—whether in the form of a binding treaty or a non-binding “soft law”
agreement—is necessary for an effective response to the environmental challenge.
Throughout most of the last century, international environmental law primarily
reflected bilateral or regional disputes over shared resources, such as rivers or lakes
that cut across national boundaries. These disputes led to diplomatic tensions that
either resulted in an international legal case or were settled through relatively narrow
regional or bilateral treaties. The most famous and important of these disputes was
the Trail Smelter Arbitration, where Canada was held responsible for air pollution
entering the United States.
In recent years, bilateral disputes involving for example Slovakia’s proposed
construction of a dam on the Danube River near Hungary, Uruguay’s authorization of
two pulp mills that threatened to pollute Argentina, and Australia’s challenge of
Japanese whaling operations, highlight the importance of international law in
peacefully resolving environmental conflicts between countries. Such disputes are
resolved at the International Court of Justice, the UN Law of the Sea Tribunal or
other international tribunals.
In addition to the peaceful resolution of environmental conflicts, international
environmental law also is relied on to balance the planet’s ecological limits with the
world’s ever-growing economy to prevent irreversible environmental harm in the first
place. Today, governments regularly meet to address the general sustainability of the
planet or to negotiate one of the literally hundreds of bilateral, regional and global
treaties aimed at managing a specific environmental challenge before it’s too late.
Sustainable Development Summits
The United Nations first convened countries to address the global environment at the
1972 UN Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm. The Stockholm
conference highlighted the international aspects of emerging environmental
challenges and legitimized the environment as an area for international
cooperation. The Stockholm conference also created the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP)— an institutional home for environmental
protection in the United Nations. Headquartered in Nairobi, Kenya, UNEP continues
today to be a leading catalyst for global environmental cooperation.
Since the 1972 Stockholm Conference, the world has met regularly in a series of
major summits aimed at shifting the world generally toward a path of
sustainability. The most important by far has been the 1992 UN Conference on
Environment and Development (UNCED), also known as the Rio "Earth
Summit.' Virtually every world leader attended the Earth Summit, where they agreed
to three major treaties (addressing climate change, biological diversity and
desertification), and a 500-page blueprint for sustainable development (known as
Agenda 21). Most importantly, Rio marked the formal acceptance of sustainable
development as the goal of a modern economy and of international environmental
law. Indeed, since Rio the concept of sustainable development has received nearly
universal acceptance among every sector of international society.
Sustainable development was also the organizing framework for major environment
and development summits in Johannesburg in 2002 and Rio again in 2012 (the
Rio+20 Summit). These summits are big affairs, attended not only by governments
but also by thousands of civil society and private sector representatives. Reflecting
this wider audience, the recent UN-sponsored Summits have promoted public-private
Partnerships for Sustainable Development and more recently led to adoption of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). These non-binding goals serve as a
strategic plan for coordinating the global community toward achieving concrete,
measurable goals by 2030.
International Environmental Principles
At both Stockholm in 1972 and at Rio in 1992, the countries adopted a set of basic
principles (see, e.g., the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development). Some of
these principles are emerging as customary law, helping to resolve environmental
disputes and guide negotiations of the various environmental treaties. Ten of the
most important environmental principles are briefly defined in the sidebar box on
page --.
Global Environmental Agreements
Since the 1972 Stockholm Conference, countries have embarked on an ambitious
schedule of international environmental treaty negotiations. Today, these treaties
form the core of international environmental law. They can be grouped into treaties
aimed at: (1) protecting the global atmosphere, including preventing climate change
and ozone depletion; (2) conserving wildlife and biological diversity; (3) managing the
oceans and marine environment; and (4) regulating global movement of chemicals,
wastes and other hazardous substances (see table of Global Environmental
Agreements).
Key Environmental Issues
Environmental issues are disruptions in the usual function of ecosystems.Further,
these issues can be caused by humans (human impact on the environment)or they
can be natural. These issues are considered serious when the ecosystem cannot
recover in the present situation, and catastrophic if the ecosystem is projected to
certainly collapse.
Environmental protection is the practice of protecting the natural environment on the
individual, organizational or governmental levels, for the benefit of both the
environment and humans. Environmentalism is a social and environmental
movement that addresses environmental issues through advocacy, legislation
education, and activism.
Environment destruction caused by humans is a global, ongoing problem. Water
pollution also cause problems to marine life.Most scholars think that the project peak
global world population of between 9-10 billion people, could live sustainably within
the earth's ecosystems if human society worked to live sustainably within planetary
boundaries.The bulk of environmental impacts are caused by excessive consumption
of industrial goods by the world's wealthiest populations. The UN Environmental
Program, in its "Making Peace With Nature" Report in 2021, found addressing key
planetary crises, like pollution, climate change and biodiversity loss, was achievable
if parties work to address the Sustainable Development Goa.Human impact on the
environment (or anthropogenic environmental impact) refers to changes
to biophysical environmentsand to ecosystems, biodiversity, and natural
resources caused directly or indirectly by humans. Modifying the environment to fit
the needs of society (as in the built environment) is causing severe effects
including global warming, environmental degradation[14] (such as ocean
acidification mass extinction and biodiversity loss,ecological crisis, and ecological
collapse. Some human activities that cause damage (either directly or indirectly) to
the environment on a global scale include population growth,neoliberal economic
policies and rapid economic growth,overconsumption, overexploitation, pollution,
and deforestation. Some of the problems, including global warming and biodiversity
loss, have been proposed as representing catastrophic risks to the survival of the
human species.
The term anthropogenic designates an effect or object resulting from human activity.
The term was first used in the technical sense by Russian geologist Alexey Pavlov,
and it was first used in English by British ecologist Arthur Tansley in reference to
human influences on climax plant communities. The atmospheric scientist Paul
Crutzen introduced the term "Anthropocene" in the mid-1970s.The term is sometimes
used in the context of pollution produced from human activity since the start of
the Agricultural Revolution but also applies broadly to all major human impacts on the
environment. Many of the actions taken by humans that contribute to a heated
environment stem from the burning of fossil fuel from a variety of sources, such as:
electricity, cars, planes, space heating, manufacturing, or the destruction of forests.
Environmental degradation is the deterioration of the environment through depletion
of resources such as quality of air, water and soil; the destruction
of ecosystems; habitat destruction; the extinction of wildlife; and pollution. It is
defined as any change or disturbance to the environment perceived to be deleterious
or undesirable.
Environmental concerns can be defined as the negative effects of any human activity
on the environment. The biological as well as the physical features of the
environment are included. Some of the primary environmental challenges that are
causing great worry are air pollution, water pollution, natural environment pollution,
rubbish pollution, and so on.
Environmental degradation is one of the ten threats officially cautioned by the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change of the United Nations. The United
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction defines environmental
degradation as "the reduction of the capacity of the environment to meet social and
ecological objectives, and needs". Environmental degradation comes in many types.
When natural habitats are destroyed or natural resources are depleted, the
environment is degraded. Efforts to counteract this problem include environmental
protection and environmental resources management. Mismanagement that leads to
degradation can also lead to environmental conflict where communities organize in
opposition to the forces that mismanaged the environment.Environmental conflicts or
ecological distribution conflicts (EDCs) are social conflicts caused by environmental
degradation or by unequal distribution of environmental
resources.[43][44][45] The Environmental Justice Atlas documented 3,100
environmental conflicts worldwide as of April 2020 and emphasised that many more
conflicts remained undocumented. Parties involved in these conflicts include locally
affected communities, states, companies and investors, and social or environmental
movements; typically environmental defenders are protecting their homelands
from resource extraction or hazardous waste disposal. Resource extraction and
hazardous waste activities often create resource scarcities (such as
by overfishing or deforestation), pollute the environment, and degrade the living
space for humans and nature, resulting in conflict. A particular case of environmental
conflicts are forestry conflicts, or forest conflicts which "are broadly viewed as
struggles of varying intensity between interest groups, over values and issues related
to forest policy and the use of forest resources". In the last decades, a growing
number of these have been identified globally.
Frequently environmental conflicts focus on environmental justice issues, the rights
of indigenous people, the rights of peasants, or threats to communities whose
livelihoods are dependent on the ocean. Outcomes of local conflicts are increasingly
influenced by trans-national environmental justice networks that comprise the global
environmental justice movement.
Environmental conflict can complicate response to natural disaster or exacerbate
existing conflicts – especially in the context of geopolitical disputes or where
communities have been displaced to create environmental migrants.
The terms socio-environmental conflict, environmental conflict, or EDCs are
sometimes used interchangeably. The study of these conflicts is related to the fields
of ecological economics, political ecology, and environmental justice.
Environmental justice or eco-justice, is a social movement to address environmental
injustice, which occurs when poor or marginalized communities are harmed
by hazardous waste, resource extraction, and other land uses from which they do not
benefit.] The movement has generated hundreds of studies showing that exposure to
environmental harm is inequitably distributed.
The movement began in the United States in the 1980s. It was heavily influenced by
the American civil rights movement and focused on environmental racism within rich
countries. The movement was later expanded to consider gender, international
environmental injustice, and inequalities within marginised groups. As the movement
achieved some success in rich countries, environmental burdens were shifted to
the Global South (as for example through extractivism or the global waste trade). The
movement for environmental justice has thus become more global, with some of its
aims now being articulated by the United Nations. The movement overlaps with
movements for Indigenous land rights and for the human right to a healthy
environment.
The goal of the environmental justice movement is to achieve agency for
marginalised communities in making environmental decisions that affect their lives.
The global environmental justice movement arises from local environmental
conflicts in which environmental defenders frequently confront multi-national
corporations in resource extraction or other industries. Local outcomes of these
conflicts are increasingly influenced by trans-national environmental justice
networks.Environmental justice scholars have produced a large interdisciplinary body
of social science literature that includes contributions to political
ecology, environmental law, and theories on justice and sustainability.Environmental
Impact assessment (EIA) is the assessment of the environmental consequences of a
plan, policy, program, or actual projects prior to the decision to move forward with the
proposed action. In this context, the term "environmental impact assessment" is
usually used when applied to actual projects by individuals or companies and the
term "strategic environmental assessment" (SEA) applies to policies, plans and
programmes most often proposed by organs of state. It is a tool of environmental
management forming a part of project approval and decision-making. Environmental
assessments may be governed by rules of administrative procedure regarding public
participation and documentation of decision making, and may be subject to judicial
review.
The purpose of the assessment is to ensure that decision-makers consider the
environmental impacts when deciding whether or not to proceed with a project.
The International Association for Impact Assessment (IAIA) defines an environmental
impact assessment as "the process of identifying, predicting, evaluating and
mitigating the biophysical, social, and other relevant effects of development
proposals prior to major decisions being taken and commitments made". EIAs are
unique in that they do not require adherence to a predetermined environmental
outcome, but rather they require decision-makers to account for environmental
values in their decisions and to justify those decisions in light of
detailed environmental studies and public comments on the potential environmental
impacts.The environmental movement (sometimes referred to as the ecology
movement), is a social movement that aims to protect the natural world from harmful
environmental practices in order to create sustainable
living.Environmentalists advocate the just and sustainable management of resources
and stewardship of the environment through changes in public policy and individual
behavior. In its recognition of humanity as a participant in (not an enemy
of) ecosystems, the movement is centered on ecology, health, as well as human
rights.
The environmental movement is an international movement, represented by a range
of environmental organizations, from enterprises to grassroots and varies from
country to country. Due to its large membership, varying and strong beliefs, and
occasionally speculative nature, the environmental movement is not always united in
its goals. At its broadest, the movement includes private citizens,
professionals, religious devotees, politicians, scientists, nonprofit organizations, and
individual advocates like former Wisconsin Senator Gaylord Nelson and Rachel
Carson in the 20th century.
Environmental issues are addressed at a regional, national or international level by
government organizations.
The largest international agency, set up in 1972, is the United Nations Environment
Programme. The International Union for Conservation of Nature brings together 83
states, 108 government agencies, 766 Non-governmental organizations and 81
international organizations and about 10,000 experts, scientists from
countries .around the world. International non-governmental
organizations include Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth and World Wide Fund for
Nature. Governments enact environmental policy and enforce environmental law and
this is done to differing degrees around the world.
Regulation of Pollution
To protect the environment from the adverse effects of pollution, many nations
worldwide have enacted legislation to regulate various types of pollution as well as to
mitigate the adverse effects of pollution. At the local level, regulation usually is
supervised by environmental agencies or the broader public health system. Different
jurisdictions often have different levels regulation and policy choices about pollution.
Historically, polluters will lobby governments in less economically developed areas or
countries to maintain lax regulation in order to protect industrialisation at the cost of
human and environmental health.[citation needed]
The modern environmental regulatory environment has its origins in the United
States with the beginning of industrial regulations around Air and Water pollution
connected to industry and mining during the 1960s and 1970s.
Because many of pollutants have trans-boundary impacts, the UN and other treaty
bodies have been used to regulate pollutants that circulate as air pollution, water
pollution or trade in wastes. Early international agreements were successful at
addressing Global Environmental issues, such as Montreal Protocol, which banned
Ozone depleting chemicals in 1987, with more recent agreements focusing on
broader, more widely dispersed chemicals such as persistent organic pollutants in
the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants created in 2001, such
as PCBs, and the Kyoto Protocol in 1997 which initiated collaboration on addressing
greenhouse gases to mitigate climate change.
Since pollution crosses political boundaries international treaties have been made
through the United Nations and its agencies to address international pollution issues.
Greenhouse gas emissions
The Kyoto Protocol is an amendment to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), an international treaty on global warming. It also
reaffirms sections of the UNFCCC. Countries which ratify this protocol commit to
reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide and five other greenhouse gases, or
engage in emissions trading if they maintain or increase emissions of these gases.A
total of 141 countries have ratified the agreement. Notable exceptions include the
United States and Australia, who have signed but not ratified the agreement. The
stated reason for the United States not ratifying is the exemption of large emitters of
greenhouse gases who are also developing countries, like China and India.
An UN environmental conference held in Bali 3–14 December 2007 with the
participation from 180 countries aims to replace the Kyoto Protocol, which will end in
2012. During the first day of the conference United States, Saudi
Arabia and Canada were presented with the "Fossil-of-the-day-award", a symbolic
bag of coal for their negative impact on the global climate. The bags included the
flags of the respective countries.
Canada
In Canada the regulation of pollution and its effects are monitored by a number of
organizations depending on the nature of the pollution and its location. The three
levels of government (Federal – Canada Wide; Provincial; and Municipal) equally
share in the responsibilities, and in the monitoring and correction of pollution.
China
China's rapid industrialization has substantially increased pollution. China has some
relevant regulations: the 1979 Environmental Protection Law, which was largely
modeled on U.S. legislation, but the environment continues to deteriorate.Twelve
years after the law, only one Chinese city was making an effort to clean up its water
discharges. This indicates that China is about 30 years behind the U.S. schedule of
environmental regulation and 10 to 20 years behind Europe. In July 2007, it was
reported that the World Bank reluctantly censored a report revealing that 750,000
people in China die every year as a result of pollution-related diseases. China's State
Environment Protection Agency and the Health Ministry asked the World Bank to cut
the calculations of premature deaths from the report fearing the revelation would
provoke "social unrest".
United Kingdom
In the 1840s, the United Kingdom brought onto the statute books legislation to control
water pollution and was strengthened in 1876 in the Rivers Pollution Prevention
Act[9] and was subsequently extended to all freshwater in the Rivers (Prevention of
Pollution) Act 1951 and applied to coastal waters by the Rivers (Prevention of
Pollution) Act 1961
The Environmental Protection Act of 1990 established the system of Integrated
Pollution Control(IPC). Currently[when?] the clean up of historic contamination is
controlled under a specific statutory scheme found in Part IIA of the Environmental
Protection Act 1996 (Part IIA), as inserted by the Environment Act 1995, and other
‘rules’ found in regulations and statutory guidance. The Act came into force in
England in April 2000.
Within the current[when?] regulatory framework, Pollution Prevention and Control
(PPC) is a regime for controlling pollution from certain designated industrial activities.
The regime introduces the concept of Best Available Techniques (BAT) to
environmental regulations. Operators must use the BAT to control pollution from their
industrial activities to prevent, and where that is not practicable, to reduce to
acceptable levels, pollution to air, land and water from industrial activities. The Best
Available Techniques also aim to balance the cost to the operator against benefits to
the environment.
The system of Pollution Prevention and Control is replacing that of IPC and has been
taking effect between 2000 and 2007. The Pollution Prevention and Control regime
implements the European Directive (EC/96/61) on integrated pollution prevention and
control.
United States
Pollution prevention (P2) is a strategy for reducing the amount of waste created and
released into the environment, particularly by industrial facilities, agriculture, or
consumers. Many large corporations view P2 as a method of improving the efficiency
and profitability of production processes through waste reduction and technology
advancements. Legislative bodies have enacted P2 measures, such as the Pollution
Prevention Act of 1990 and the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 in the United
States Congress.
Air pollution
The United States Congress passed the Clean Air Act in 1963 to legislate the
reduction of smog and atmospheric pollution in general. That legislation has
subsequently been amended and extended in 1966, 1970, 1977 and 1990. In
1968 AP 42 Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors. Numerous state and local
governments have enacted similar legislation either implementing or filling in locally
important gaps in the national program. The national Clean Air Act and
similar state legislative acts have led to the widespread use of atmospheric
dispersion modeling in order to analyze the air quality impacts of proposed major
actions. With the 1990 Clean Air Act, the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) began a controversial carbon trading system in which tradable rights
to emit a specified level of carbon are granted to polluters.[citation needed]
Water pollution
Enactment of the 1972 Clean Water Act (CWA) required thousands of facilities to
obtain permits for discharges to navigable waters, through the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). It also required EPA to establish national
technology-based discharge standards for municipal sewage treatment plants, and
for many industrial categories (the latter are called "effluent guidelines.")
Municipal and industrial permittees are required to regularly collect and analyze
wastewater samples, and submit Discharge Monitoring Reports to a state agency or
EPA. Amendments in 1977 required stricter regulation of toxic pollutants. In 1987
Congress expanded NPDES permit coverage to include municipal and
industrial stormwater discharges.
The Act also requires use of best management practices for a wide range of other
water discharges including nonpoint source pollution.
Thermal pollution discharges are regulated under section 316(a) of the
CWA. NPDES permits include effluent limitations on water temperature to protect the
biotic life supported by a water body. A permittee may request a variance to the
typical thermal limitations. Alternate limitations may be issued in limited
circumstances, if the permittee has provided sufficient proof through data submission
that aquatic life in the water body will be protected.
In addition to wastewater discharge monitoring, EPA works with federal, state and
local environmental agencies to conduct ambient water monitoring programs in water
bodies nationwide. The CWA requires EPA and the states to prepare reports to
Congress on the condition of the nation's waters. Ambient water quality data
collected by EPA, the US Geological Survey and other organizations are available to
the public in several online databases.
Land Pollution
Congress passed the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) in 1976,
which created a regulatory framework for both municipal solid waste and hazardous
waste disposed on land.RCRA requires that all hazardous wastes be managed and
tracked from generation of the waste, through transport and processing, to final
disposal, by means of a nationwide permit system. The Hazardous and Solid Waste
Amendments of 1984 mandated regulation of underground storage tanks containing
petroleum and hazardous chemicals, and the phasing out of land disposal of
hazardous waste. The Federal Facilities Compliance Act, passed in 1992, clarified
RCRA coverage of federally owned properties such as military bases. Illegal disposal
of waste is punishable by fines of up to $25,000 per occurrence.
Alongside municipal and hazardous waste the EPA is in charge of soil conservation.
The EPA, often with the help of state partners, manages soil contamination through
contaminant sites and facilities. An annual report on the Environment and a Toxics
Release Inventory is produced as a result of these efforts.
To specifically mitigate soil pollution from fertilizers, the USDA, National Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS), National Institutue of Food and Agriculture (NIFA),
and Agricultural Research Service (ARS) monitor soil resources and provide
guidelines to prevent nutrient loss.
Waste Management Laws
With the increasing industrial growth and development, one of the consequences we
often seem to ignore is the generation of waste. If the disposal of such wastes is not
regulated and managed properly, it can lead to serious environmental issues. Also,
keeping in line with the principle that development and sustainability should go handin-hand, it is necessary that a robust system of waste management is set up. In our
country, waste management is governed by Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change (MoEF) who work together with State Pollution Control Board set up
in various States. Certain laws are also present in the legal setup which helps in
regulation of waste in India. The National Environment Policy, 2006 laid emphasis
not only on disposal of waste but also recycling and treating waste. Let us now look
at some of the laws, which are there for the purpose of waste regulation.
The Environmental Protection Act
This Act was enacted in 1986, and it aims to establish a sufficient protection system.
This Act confers powers to the Central Government to regulate all forms of waste. It
is one of the primary legislatures to protect the environment and regulation of waste.
Some of the important provisions of this Act is given as underSection 7 of this Act places a principal prohibition on harming the environment by
stating that no person carrying any activity should emit or discharge environmental
pollutants in excess of the prescribed standards.
Section 9 of the Act states that if any event takes place which harms the environment
through any foreseen or unforeseen event, the person responsible for the harm is
duty bound to prevent or alleviate the pollutant, discharged as a result of such event.
The person is also obliged to inform the proper authorities about the event which may
harm the environment.
*Polluter Pays Principle– Section 9 (3) of the Act embodies the “Polluter Pays
Principle” which states that any expense which has been incurred to restore the
environment to its natural state shall be paid by the person who is responsible for
such degradation. This concept of a continuing punishment is very important.
1. The Act also contains provisions which remove the corporate veil. In case
any environmental offense was committed by a company, with the
connivance or consent of any director, manager, secretary or any other
officer of the company, they’ll be help personally liable for committing
offenses in the name of the company.
2. Environmental Protection Rules-Commonly known as the Environmental
Protection Rules, 1986, these rules were formulated by the government
under the power conferred to them by the Environmental Protection Act.
Through these powers, the government has the authority to give specific
directions, without changing the principle Act.
The Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and Transboundary Movement)
Rules, 2008
Management of hazardous waste is a very complex issue. Certain rules and
regulations are required, which together form the legal regime. The Rules places an
obligation on the occupier of hazardous to safe and sound handling of environmental
waste. The occupier is that person under whose charge there is a plant or unit or
factory which produces hazardous waste as a result of their operation. The occupier
must sell or send the hazardous waste to a re-processor or recycler, who is
authorized by the government to dispose of the waste in a safe manner. Any person
who is engaged in storage, package, collection, destruction, conversion, processing,
etc., also has to take authorization for the State Pollution Board.
The recyclers, occupiers, re-users, re-processors can store the waste for up to 90
days.
Sale or transfer of hazardous waste can be done only after obtaining a valid
registration form Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB). Use of the waste as a
source of energy also requires registration from the CPCB.
The trans-boundary shipment of hazardous waste is regulated by the Basel
Convention, to whom India is a signatory. Import of hazardous waste for disposal in
India is prohibited by law, although import for the purpose of reuse, recovery as an
energy source and recycling is allowed subject to certain restrictions. India allows for
the export of hazardous waste but only with the prior informed consent of the
importing country.
The Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011
The PWM Rules are set of regulatory framework set up to control the use,
manufacture, and recycling of plastic waste. Plastic waste includes any plastic
product which has been discarded after it use of end of the products life. The Rule
has uniform applicability towards all distributors, users, retailers and manufacturers of
plastic products. Rule 9 makes it compulsory for every manufacturer of plastic
products and recycler to obtain registration from State Pollution Control Board. This
registration has to be renewed every three years. Rule 10 states that no retailer can
provide plastic bags free of cost. This is done to ensure that people use plastic bags
judicially. The PWM rules also specify details of plastic products such as the
classification of the types of plastic like compostable, recyclable or virgin plastic,
thickness, and color.
Recycling of plastic products is to be done in a fixed procedure laid down by Bureau
of Indian Standard Specification.
Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998
The aim of these Rules is to ensure that bio-medical wastes are safely disposed of.
Bio-medical waste can be defined as any waste or byproduct generated during
treatment, immunization and treatment of human beings or animals or in research
activities.Schedule I of the Rules, differentiates biological wastes into different
categories like microbiological and biotechnological, human anatomical, animal
anatomical, discarded medicines, chemical related waste, etc.
The BMW Rules apply to various institutions like nursing homes, animal houses,
veterinary homes, blood banks, dispensaries, pathological laboratories, etc. the BMW
Rules prohibit mixing of biological wastes with any other type of wastes. The general
rule provided is that bio-medical wastes can’t be kept stored beyond the period of 48
hours without being treated. Rule 8 (1) requires every occupier or any institution
which is dealing with biological waste to take an authorization form the State
Pollution Control Board. Further, according to Rule 5 (2), all institutions covered
under the rules are to mandatorily set up treatment facilities like microwave system,
autoclave, etc.
The E- Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011
The prime aim of the EWM is to put in place a system which manages e-waste in an
environment-friendly way by regulating the issue of recycling and disposal of ewaste. E-waste management is a problematic issue in India. With the growing
economy and the technological advancement, India is becoming a hub for the IT
Sector. This creates a lot of e-waste, disposal of which is necessary. A lot of e-waste
also gets illegally imported into India, which worsens the problem. The E-waste Rules
apply manufacturer and consumer. It is important to note that there are bulk
consumers of electronic products also. There are many big corporate houses, who
have fully automated their system and use a lot of electronic devices to meet their
purposes. Factories are also considered as bulk customers.
E-waste defined under the Rule 3 (k) means any electronic or electrical equipment
which has been rejected after use or have been discarded. The byproducts which are
discarded during the manufacturing process also falls under this category. The
producer of electronic and electrical goods must obtain permission from State
Pollution Control Board under rule 4. E-waste Rules also delineate the
responsibilities of collection centers, consumers, bulk consumers, dismantlers, and
recyclers.
The Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules, 2001
The Batteries Rules were notified to set up a mechanism in place which dealt with
the disposal of lead acid batteries. The Rules apply to every manufacturer, recycler,
dealer, importer, assembler, bulk consumer (like organizations and department
purchasing more than 100 batteries) and consumers.Rule 10 makes it compulsory for
every consumer to deposit the used batteries back with the dealer, manufacturer,
recycler or labeled collection centers. Bulk consumers are also required to file halfyearly returns with the State Pollution Control Board, about the usage. Under Rule 6,
if a recycler wants to import used batteries in India, for the purpose of recycling, he
must first obtain Custom clearance. Additionally, import of batteries will be allowed
only upon producing valid registration with Reserve Bank of India and MoEF and
providing an undertaking in prescribed format along with a copy of the latest halfyearly return.
With the increasing industrial activities, the need for maintaining a balance between
economic growth and environment protection grows. There is an increased focus
towards the concept of sustainable development, wherein, both the objectives can be
fulfilled simultaneously without hampering the other. Compliance with environmental
norms also builds a better brand image of the organization. Apart from that, the rules
and laws regarding the management of waste and protection of the environment
have become more stringent. No laxity is accepted in the obligation of functioning in
an environment-friendly manner. If organizations do not follow the provided norms,
their right to carry out business operations can also be revoked by the State. To
avoid such sanctions, it is important that organizations approach the issue of
environment protection and waste management in an efficient way, and help the
society as a whole to develop in a manner, which is sustainable in the longer run.
Biological Diversity Act, 2002
The Act’s main objective is to ensure the conservation of biological
diversity, sustainable use of its components and fair usage of its resources in
order to prevent overuse or eventual destruction of biodiversity.
Since India is one of the most biologically diverse nations in the world, this act is a
necessity to protect its biological heritage.
The salient features of the Biological Diversity Act are as follows.
Regulation of access to biological resources of the country
Conservation and sustainability of biological diversity
Protecting the knowledge of local communities regarding biodiversity
Secure sharing of benefits with local people as conservers of biological resources
and holders of knowledge and information relating to the use of biological resources
Protection and rehabilitation of threatened species
Involvement of institutions of state governments in the broad scheme of the
implementations of the Biological Diversity Act through the establishment of
dedicated committees.
Any offense under this Act is non-bailable and cognizable
Any grievances related to the determination of benefit sharing or order of the National
Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board under this Act shall be taken to
the National Green Tribunal (NGT).
Exemptions from the Biological Diversity Act
The Act excludes Indian biological resources that are normally traded as
commodities.
Such exemption holds only so far the biological resources are used as
commodities and for no other purpose.
The act also excludes traditional uses of Indian biological resources and associated
knowledge and when they are used in collaborative research projects between Indian
and foreign institutions with the approval of the central government.
Uses by cultivators and breeds, e.g. farmers, livestock keepers and beekeepers and
traditional healers e.g.vaids and hakims are also exempted.
National Biodiversity Authority
In order to carry out the provisions of the act, the National Biodiversity Authority (NBA)
had been set up under the Ministry of Environments and Forest by the Government
of India in 2003. The NBA is a statutory, autonomous body headquartered in Chennai.
State Biodiversity Boards (SBB) were also created in the 29 states along with
Biological management committees for each local body.
Under this act, the Central Government in consultation with the NBA:
 Shall notify threatened species and prohibit or regulate their collection,
rehabilitation, and conservation. Check out the IUCN Red list to know more
about endangered species.
 Designate institutions as repositories for different categories of biological
resources
The functions of the National Biodiversity Authority are as follows
 Monitoring and prevention of actions prohibited under the Act.
 Providing advice to the government on how best to conserve biodiversity in
India.
 Prepare a report on how the government can select biological heritage sites.
 Make concrete steps to prevent the grant of intellectual property rights
regarding locally used biological resources or allied traditional knowledge.
Structure of the NBA
The National Biodiversity Authority consists of the following members to be appointed
by the central government, namely:
 A Chairperson.
 Three ex officio members, one representing the Ministry dealing with Tribal
Affairs and two representing the Ministry dealing with Environment and
Forests.
 Seven ex-officio members to represent respectively the Ministries of the
Central Government dealing with:
 Agricultural Research and Education
 Biotechnology
 Ocean Development
 Agriculture and Cooperation
 Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
 Science and Technology
 Scientific and Industrial Research;
To know more about Intellectual Property Rights in India, visit the linked article
Should any Foreign individuals or corporate body seek to obtain knowledge or allied
resources for the purpose of research, survey, and commercial utilization, then they
need to take permission from the NBA. Indian citizens or corporates seeking to the
same need to take permission from their respective State Biodiversity Boards.
The outcome of research that had utilized biological resources from India cannot be
given to a foreigner or a foreign company without the consent of the NBA. But such
approval is not required for the publication of the research in a journal done by
institutions that affiliated with the Central Government or approved by it.
Renewable Energy Policies and Barriers
The need for enacting policies to support renewable energy is often attributed to a
variety of “barriers” or conditions that prevent investments from occurring. Often the
result of barriers is to put renewable energy at an economic, regulatory, or
institutional disadvantage relative to other forms of energy supply. Barriers include
subsidies for conventional forms of energy, high initial capital costs coupled with lack
of fuel-price risk assessment, imperfect capital markets, lack of skills or information,
poor market acceptance, technology prejudice, financing risks and uncertainties, high
transactions costs, and a variety of regulatory and institutional factors. Many of these
barriers could be considered “market distortions” that unfairly discriminate against
renewable energy, while others have the effect of increasing the costs of renewable
energy relative to the alternatives. Barriers are often quite situation-specific in any
given region or country; nevertheless, three broad categories of barriers are
discussed in this section.
Costs and Pricing Many argue that renewable energy “costs more” than other energy
sources, resulting in cost-driven decisions and policies that avoid renewable energy.
In practice, a variety of factors can distort the comparison. For example, public
subsidies may lower the costs of competing fuels. Although it is true that initial capital
costs for renewable energy technologies are often higher on a cost-per-unit basis
(i.e., $/kW), it is widely accepted that a true comparison must be made on the basis
of total “lifecycle” costs. Lifecycle costs account for initial capital costs, future fuel
costs, future operation and maintenance costs,decommissioning costs, and
equipment lifetime. Here lies part of the problem in making comparisons: What are
fuel costs going to be in the future? How should future costs be discounted to allow
comparison with present costs based on expected interest rates? The uncertainties
inherent in these questions affect cost comparisons.
Existing analytical tools for calculating and comparing costs can discriminate against
renewable energy if they do not account for future uncertainties or make unrealistic
assumptions. Many policies attempt to compensate for cost-related barriers by
providing additional subsidies for renewable energy in the form of tax credits or
incentives, by establishing special pricing and powerpurchasing rules, and by
lowering transaction costs. Despite many calls for reducing subsidies for fossil fuels
and nuclear power, in practice this proves politically difficult. Thus practical policies
have tended to focus on increasing subsidies for renewable energy rather than
reducing subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear power. Subsidies for competing fuels.
Large public subsidies, both implicit and explicit, are channeled in varying amounts to
all forms of energy, which can distort investment cost decisions. Organizations such
as the World Bank and International Energy Agency put global annual subsidies for
fossil fuels in the range of $100-200 billion, although such figures are very difficult to
estimate (for comparison, the world spends some $1 trillion annually on purchases of
fossil fuels). Public subsidies can take many forms: direct budgetary transfers, tax
incentives, R&D spending, liability insurance, leases, land rights-of-way, waste
disposal, and guarantees to mitigate project financing or fuel price risks. Large
subsidies for fossil fuels can significantly lower final energy prices, putting renewable
energy at a competitive disadvantage if it does not enjoy equally large subsidies.
High initial capital costs. Even though lower fuel and operating costs may make
renewable energy cost-competitive on a life-cycle basis, higher initial capital costs
can mean that renewable energy provides less installed capacity per initial dollar
invested than conventional energy sources. Thus, renewable energy investments
generally require higher amounts of financing for the same capacity. Depending on
the circumstances, capital markets may demand a premium in lending rates for
financing renewable energy projects because more capital is being risked up front
than in conventional energy projects. Renewable energy technologies may also face
high taxes and import duties. These duties may exacerbate the high first-cost
considerations relative to other technologies and fuels.
Difficulty of fuel price risk assessment. Risks associated with fluctuations in future
fossil-fuel prices may not be quantitatively considered in decisions about new power
generation capacity because these risks are inherently difficult to assess. Historically,
future fuel price risk has not been considered an important factor because future
fossil fuel prices have been assumed to be relatively stable or moderately increasing.
Thus, risks of severe fluctuations are often ignored. However, with greater
geopolitical uncertainties and energy market deregulation has come new awareness
about future fuel price risks. Renewable energy technologies avoid fuel costs (with
the exception of biomass) and so avoid fuel price risk. However, this benefit, or “riskreduction premium,” is often missing from economic comparisons and analytical tools
because it is difficult to quantify. Further, for some regulated utilities, fuel costs are
factored into regulated power rates, so that consumers rather than utilities bear the
burden of fuel price risks, and utility investment decisions are made without
considering fuel price risk.
Unfavorable power pricing rules. Renewable energy sources feeding into an electric
power grid may not receive full credit for the value of their power. Two factors are at
work. First, renewable energy generated on distribution networks near final
consumers rather than at centralized generation facilities may not require
transmission and distribution (i.e., would displace power coming from a transmission
line into a node of a distribution network). But utilities may only pay wholesale rates
for the power, as if the generation was located far from final consumers and required
transmission and distribution. Thus, the “locational” value of the power is not
captured by the producer. Second, renewable energy is often an 5 “intermittent”
source whose output level depends on the resource (i.e., wind and sun) and cannot
be entirely controlled. Utilities cannot count on the power at any given time and may
lower prices for it. Lower prices take two common forms: (i) a zero price for the
“capacity value” of the generation (utility only pays for the “energy value”); (ii) an
average price paid at peak times (when power is more valuable) which is lower than
the value of the power to the utility—even though the renewable energy output may
directly correspond with peak demand times and thus should be valued at peak
prices.
Transaction costs. Renewable energy projects are typically smaller than conventional
energy projects. Projects may require additional information not readily available, or
may require additional time or attention to financing or permitting because of
unfamiliarity with the technologies or uncertainties over performance. For these
reasons, the transaction costs of renewable energy projects—including resource
assessment, siting, permitting, planning, developing project proposals, assembling
financing packages, and negotiating power-purchase contracts with utilities—may be
much larger on a per-kilowatt (kW) capacity basis than for conventional power plants.
Higher transaction costs are not necessarily an economic distortion in the same way
as some other barriers, but simply make renewables more expensive. However, in
practice some transaction costs may be unnecessarily high, for example, overly
burdensome utility interconnection requirements and high utility fees for engineering
reviews and inspection.
Environmental externalities. The environmental impacts of fossil fuels often result in
real costs to society, in terms of human health (i.e., loss of work days, health care
costs), infrastructure decay (i.e., from acid rain), declines in forests and fisheries, and
perhaps ultimately, the costs associated with climate change. Dollar costs of
environmental externalities are difficult to evaluate and depend on assumptions that
can be subject to wide interpretation and discretion. Although environmental impacts
and associated dollar costs are often included in economic comparisons between
renewable and conventional energy, investors rarely include such environmental
costs in the bottom line used to make decisions.
Legal and Regulatory
1. Lack of legal framework for independent power producers. In many countries,
power utilities still control a monopoly on electricity production and distribution. In
these circumstances, in the absence of a legal framework, independent power
producers may not be able to invest in renewable energy facilities and sell power to
the utility or to third parties under so-called “power purchase agreements.” Or utilities
may negotiate power purchase agreements on an individual ad-hoc basis, making it
difficult for project developers to plan and finance projects on the basis of known and
consistent rules.
2. Restrictions on siting and construction. Wind turbines, rooftop solar hot-water
heaters, photovoltaic installations, and biomass combustion facilities may all face
building restrictions based upon height, aesthetics, noise, or safety, particularly in
urban areas. Wind turbines have faced specific environmental concerns related to
siting along migratory bird paths and coastal areas. Urban planning departments or
building inspectors may be unfamiliar with renewable energy technologies and may
not have established procedures for dealing with siting and permitting. Competition
for land use with agricultural, recreational, scenic, or development interests can also
occur.
3. Transmission access. Utilities may not allow favorable transmission access to
renewable energy producers, or may charge high prices for transmission access.
Transmission access is necessary because some renewable energy resources like
windy sites and biomass fuels may be located far from population centers.
Transmission or distribution access is also necessary for direct third-party sales
between the renewable energy producer and a final consumer. New transmission
access to remote renewable energy sites may be blocked by transmission-access
rulings or right-of-way disputes.
4. Utility interconnection requirements. Individual home or commercial systems
connected to utility grids can face burdensome, inconsistent, or unclear utility
interconnection requirements. Lack of uniform requirements can add to transaction
costs. Safety and power-quality risk from non-utility generation is a legitimate
concern of utilities, but a utility may tend to set interconnection requirements that go
beyond what is necessary or practical for small producers, in the absence of any
incentive to set more reasonable but still technically sound requirements. In turn, the
transaction costs of hiring legal and technical experts to understand and comply with
interconnection requirements may be significant. Policies that create sound and
uniform interconnection standards can reduce interconnection hurdles and costs.
5. Liability insurance requirements. Small power generators (particularly home PV
systems feeding into the utility grid under “net metering” provisions) may face
excessive requirements for liability insurance. The phenomenon of “islanding,” which
occurs when a self-generator continues to feed power into the grid when power flow
from the central utility source has been interrupted, can result in serious injury or
death to utility repair crews. Although proper equipment standards can prevent
islanding, liability is still an issue. Several U.S. states have prohibited utilities from
requiring additional insurance beyond normal homeowner liability coverage as part of
net metering statutes.
Market Performance Lack of access to credit. Consumers or project developers may
lack access to credit to purchase or invest in renewable energy because of lack of
collateral, poor creditworthiness, or distorted capital markets. In rural areas,
“microcredit” lending for household-scale renewable energy systems may not exist.
Available loan terms may be too short relative to the equipment or investment lifetime.
In some countries, power project developers have difficulty obtaining bank financing
because of uncertainty as to whether utilities will continue to honor long-term power
purchase agreements to buy the power.
Perceived technology performance uncertainty and risk. Proven, cost-effective
technologies may still be perceived as risky if there is little experience with them in a
new application or region. The lack of visible installations and familiarity with
renewable energy technologies can lead to perceptions of greater technical risk than
for conventional energy sources. These perceptions may increase required rates of
return, result in less capital availability, or place more stringent requirements on
technology selection and resource assessment. “Lack of utility acceptance” is a
phrase used to describe the historical biases and prejudices on the part of traditional
electric power utilities. Utilities may be hesitant to develop, acquire, and maintain
unfamiliar technologies, or give them proper attention in planning frameworks. Finally,
prejudice may exist because of poor past performance that is out of step with current
performance norms.
Lack of technical or commercial skills and information. Markets function best when
everyone has low-cost access to good information and the requisite skills. But in
specific markets, skilled personnel who can install, operate, and maintain renewable
energy technologies may not exist in large numbers. Project developers may lack
sufficient technical, financial, and business development skills. Consumers,
managers, engineers, architects, lenders, or planners may lack information about
renewable energy technology characteristics, economic and financial costs and
benefits, geographical resources, operating experience, maintenance requirements,
sources of finance, and installation services. The lack of skills and information may
increase perceived uncertainties and block decisions.
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROMOTION POLICIES Policies whose specific goal is to
promote renewable energy fall into three main categories: (a) pricesetting and
quantity-forcing policies, which mandate prices or quantities; (b) investment cost
reduction policies, which provide incentives in the form of lower investment costs;
and (c) public investments and market facilitation activities, which offer a wide range
of public policies that reduce market barriers and facilitate or accelerate renewable
energy markets. Historically, governments have enacted these policies in a rather adhoc manner. More recently, national renewable energy targets (also referred to as
goals) have emerged as a political context for promoting specific combinations of
policies from all three categories. Such targets focus on the aggregate energy
production of an entire country or group of countries. Targets may specify total
primary energy from renewables and/or minimum renewable energy shares of
electricity generation. Several countries have adopted or are proposing national
renewable energy targets. The European Union collectively has adopted a target of
22% of total electricity generation from renewables by 2010, with individual member
states having individual targets above or below that amount. Japan has adopted a
target of 3% of total primary energy by 2010. Recent legislative proposals in the
United States would require 10% of electricity generation from renewables by 2020.
China and India are the first developing countries to propose renewable energy
targets. India has proposed that by 2012, 10% of annual additions to power
generation would be from renewable energy; China has a similar goal of 5% by 2010.
Other countries with existing or proposed targets are Australia, Brazil, Malaysia, and
Thailand. In addition, countries from around the world placed increased attention on
renewable energy targets at the U.N. World Summit for Sustainable Development in
2002.
Price-Setting and Quantity-Forcing Policies Price-setting policies reduce cost- and
pricing-related barriers by establishing favorable pricing regimes for renewable
energy relative to other sources of power generation. The quantity of investment
obtained under such regimes is unspecified, but prices are known in advance.
Quantity-forcing policies do the opposite; they mandate a certain percentage or
absolute quantity of generation to be supplied from renewable energy, at unspecified
prices. Often price-setting or quantity-forcing policies occur in parallel with other
policies, such as investment cost reduction policies. The two main price-setting
policies seen to-date are the PURPA legislation in the United States and “electricity
feed-in laws” in Europe. The two main quantity-forcing policies seen to-date are
competitively-bid renewable-resource obligations and renewable portfolio standards.
U. S. Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act (PURPA). PURPA was enacted in 1978 in
part to encourage electric power production by small power producers using
renewable resources to reduce U.S. dependence on foreign oil. The policy required
utilities to purchase power from small renewable generators and cogenerators,
known as “qualifying facilities,” through long-term (10-year) contracts at prices
approximating the “avoided costs” of the utilities. These avoided costs represented
the marginal costs to the utilities of building new generation facilities, which could be
avoided by purchasing power from the qualifying facilities instead. Avoided cost
calculations typically assumed an aggressive schedule of escalating future energy
prices, making contract prices to qualifying facilities quite attractive. For example,
“standard offer” contracts under PURPA in California in the 1980’s set the avoided
cost of generation in the range 6-10 cents/kWh—very favorable rates which initially
spurred many investments by renewable energy producers. However, by the 1990s
energy prices had not risen as originally expected and a large number of natural-gas
fired independent generation came on-line in California. 8 Power surpluses emerged,
wholesale power prices declined, and declining standard offer rates led to reduced
competitiveness of renewable energy and a significant slowdown in construction of
new capacity
Electricity Feed-in Laws. The electricity feed-in laws in Germany, and similar policies
in other European countries in the 1990s, set a fixed price for utility purchases of
renewable energy. For example, in Germany starting in 1991, renewable energy
producers could sell their power to utilities at 90% of the retail market price. The
utilities were obligated to purchase the power. The German feed-in law led to a rapid
increase in installed capacity and development of commercial renewable energy
markets. Wind power purchase prices were highly favorable, amounting to about DM
0.17/kWh (US 10 cents/kWh), and applied over the entire life of the plant. Total wind
power installed went from near zero in the early 1990s to over 8500 MW by 2001,
making Germany the global leader in renewable energy investment. Partly because
retail electricity prices declined with increasing competition due to electricity
deregulation, which made producers and financiers wary of new investments, a new
German Renewable Energy Law of 2000 changed electricity feed-in pricing. Pricing
became based on fixed norms unique to each technology, which in turn were based
upon estimates of power production costs and expectations of declines in those costs
over time. For example, wind power prices remained at the previous level of DM
0.17/kWh for plants commissioned in 2001, but only for the first five years of
operation, after which prices paid declined. Solar PV prices were set initially at DM
0.99/kWh. All prices had build-in declines over time (i.e., 1.5% annual decreases in
starting tariffs paid for wind power plants commissioned in subsequent years). This
provision addressed one of the historical criticisms of feed-in approaches, which was
that they did not encourage technology cost reductions or innovation. The new law’s
provisions for regular adjustments to prices addressed technological and market
developments. The law also distributed the costs of the policy (i.e., the additional
costs of wind power over conventional power) among all utility customers in the
country. This issue of burden sharing had become a significant political issue in
Germany by 2000 because the old law placed a disproportionate burden on utility
customers in specific regions where wind power development was heaviest. Other
countries in Europe with renewable electricity feed-in laws include Denmark, France,
Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden. A combination of feed-in tariffs,
production subsidies of DK 0.10/kWh, and a strong domestic market helped the
Danish wind industry maintain a 50% market share of global wind turbine production
for a number of years.
Competitively-bid renewable-resource obligations. The United Kingdom tried
competitive bidding for renewable-energy-resource obligations during the 1990s
under its “Non-Fossil-Fuel Obligation” (NFFO) policy. Under the NFFO, power
producers bid on providing a fixed quantity of renewable power, with the lowest-price
bidder winning the contact. With each successive bidding round (there were four
total), bidders reduced prices relative to the last round. For example, wind power
contract prices declined from 10 p/kWh in 1990 under NFFO-1, to 4.5 p/kWh in 1997
under NFFO-4. One of the lessons some have drawn from the UK experience is that
competitively determined subsidies can lead to rapidly declining prices for renewable
energy. However, there has also been criticism that the NFFO process encouraged
competing projects to bid below cost in order to capture contracts, with the result that
successful bidders were unable to meet the terms of the bid or ended up insolvent.
This criticism proved valid in practice; contracts awarded to low-bidders did not
always translate into projects on the ground. The UK abandoned the NFFO approach
after the fourth round of bidding in 1997. Other countries with similar competitivelybid renewable resource mechanisms have included Ireland (under the “AER”
program), France (under the “EOLE” program), and Australia (under the “RECP”
program).
Renewable energy portfolio standards (RPS). An RPS requires that a minimum
percentage of generation sold or capacity installed be provided by renewable energy.
Obligated utilities are required to ensure that the target is met, either through their
own generation, power purchases from other producers, 9 or direct sales from thirdparties to the utility’s customers. Typically, RPS obligations are placed on the final
retailers of power, who must purchase either a portion of renewable power or the
equivalent amount of green certificates (see next section). Two types of standards
have emerged: capacity-based standards set a fixed amount of capacity by a given
date, while generation-based standards mandate a given percentage of electricity
generation that must come from renewable energy. In the United States, many RPS
policies have occurred as part of utility restructuring legislation. These are typically
generation-based standards with phased implementation to allow utilities to reach
incrementally increasing targets over a number of years. At least twelve U.S. states
have enacted an RPS, ranging from 1% to 30% of electricity generation. However,
the amount of new and additional generation expected from these standards varies
widely depending on existing renewable energy capacity. For example, Maine
historically generates over 40% of its power from renewable resources, so its 30%
standard is unlikely to result in any new renewable generation. In contrast,
California’s requirement to increase renewable sales from 10.5% in 2001 to 20% by
2017 will likely result in a significant amount of new in-state renewable energy
generation. Texas implemented an RPS in 2000 requiring 2000 MW of new
renewable capacity by 2008. Partly due to federal production tax credits, Texas has
been substantially ahead of schedule, with half of the targeted capacity in place by
2002. In Europe, the Netherlands has been a leader among RPS initiatives. Dutch
utilities have adopted an RPS voluntarily, based on targets of 5% of electricity
generation by 2010, increasing to 17% by 2020. Other countries with regulatory
requirements for utilities or electricity retailers to purchase a percentage of renewable
power include Australia, Brazil, Belgium, Denmark, France, Japan, Spain, Sweden,
and the United Kingdom. The UK's `Renewables Obligation' on suppliers will rise in
annual steps from 3% in 2003 to 10% in 2010. In Denmark, legislation obliges end
users to purchase 20% of their electricity from renewable sources by 2003. In Brazil,
a policy enacted during the electricity crisis of 2001 requires national utilities to
purchase over 3000 MW of renewable energy capacity by 2016. Purchase prices are
set by the government at 80 percent of the national average electricity retail price.
Thus, in contrast to most national policies elsewhere, Brazil’s policy is effectively both
“price-setting” and “quantity-forcing.”
Renewable Energy (Green) Certificates. Renewable energy (green) certificates are
emerging as a way for utilities and customers to trade renewable energy production
and/or consumption credits in order to meet obligations under RPS and similar
policies. Standardized certificates provide evidence of renewable energy production,
and are coupled with institutions and rules for trading that separate renewable
attributes from the associated physical energy. This enables a “paper” market for
renewable energy to be created independent of actual electricity sales and flows.
Green certificate markets are emerging in several countries, allowing producers or
purchasers of renewable energy who earn green certificates to sell those certificates
to those who need to meet obligations but haven’t generated or purchased the
renewable power themselves. Those without obligations, but wishing to voluntarily
support green power for philosophical or public-relations reasons may also purchase
certificates. Public and private institutions are emerging that keep track of renewable
energy generation, assign certificates to generators, and register trades and sales of
certificates. Green certificate trading is gaining ground in the UK, Belgium, Denmark,
Australia, and the United States. Europe embarked upon a “test phase” of an EUwide renewable energy certificate trading system during 2001 and 2002; more than
40 companies in 7 countries had opened trading accounts, with a further 100
companies intending to join the test phase in late 2002. Certificates for over 1,000
GWh were issued through 2002. 10 B. Cost Reduction Policies A number of policies
are designed to provide incentives for voluntary investments in renewable energy by
reducing the costs of such investments. These policies can be characterized as
falling in five broad categories: policies that
Reduce capital costs up front (via subsidies and rebates)
Reduce capital costs after purchase (via tax relief)
Offset costs through a stream of payments based on power production (via
production tax credits)
Provide concessionary loans and other financial assistance
Reduce capital and installation costs through economies of bulk procurement.
Subsidies and Rebates. Reduction in the initial capital outlay by consumers for
renewable energy systems is accomplished through direct subsidies, or rebates.
These subsidies are used to “buy down” the initial capital cost of the system, so that
the consumer sees a lower price. In the United States, at least nineteen states offer
rebate programs at the state, local, and/or utility level to promote the installation of
renewable energy equipment. The majority of the programs are available from state
agencies and municipally-owned utilities and support solar water heating and/or
photovoltaic systems, though some include geothermal heat pumps, small wind
generators, passive solar, biomass, and fuel cells. Homes and businesses are
usually eligible, although some programs target industry and public institutions as
well. In some cases, rebate programs are combined with low or no-interest loans.
Sustained efforts to increase the use of renewables have been made via coordinated,
multi-year, multipolicy initiatives. For example, Japan, Germany, and the United
States subsidize capital costs of solar PV as part of their “market transformation”
programs. • Japan's Sunshine Program provides capital subsidies and net metering
for rooftop PV systems. From 1994 to 2000, the government invested 86 billion yen
($725 million USD), resulting in 58,000 system installations and over 220 MW of PV
capacity. Subsidies began at 900,000 yen/peak-kW (US$5/peak-watt) in 1994, and
were gradually reduced to 120,000 yen/peak-kW (US$1/peak-watt) in 2001 as PV
prices fell. • Germany began a “1000 solar roofs” program in 1991 that offered
subsidies for individual household purchases of solar PV of up to 60% of capital
system costs. The program was expanded in 1999 to 100,000 roofs over five years,
providing 10-year low-interest loans to households and businesses. As a result of
favorable feed-in tariffs and low-interest loans, the program was expected to provide
300 peak-MW of PV capacity. • The United States launched a “million solar roofs”
initiative in 1997 to install solar PV systems and solar thermal systems on one million
buildings by 2010. The program includes long-term low-interest customer financing,
government procurement for federal buildings, commercialization programs, and
production incentives. Individual states also have capital subsidy programs for PV,
with the California Energy Commission offering rebates of up to $4.50/peak-watt or
50 percent off the system purchase price, New York and New Jersey offering up to
$5/peak-watt subsidies, and New York rebating as much as 70% of the cost of
eligible equipment as of 2002. Subsidy programs also exist for wind power, such as
Denmark’s DK 0.10/kWh (US 1.5 cents/kWh) production subsidy paid to utilities.
Among developing countries, Thailand provided subsidies for small renewable
energy power producers starting in 2000, soliciting bids for 300 MW of small
renewable power, and providing production subsidies above standard power
purchase rates for at least the first five years of operation of each facility.
Tax Relief. Tax relief policies to promote renewable energy have been employed in
the United States, Europe, Japan, and India. Tax relief has been especially popular
in the United States, where a host of 11 federal and state tax policies address energy
production, property investments, accelerated depreciation, and renewable fuels.
State policies vary widely in scope and implementation. At least 17 states have
personal tax incentives, 21 states have corporate tax incentives, 16 states have sales
tax incentives, and 24 states have property tax incentives. a. Investment Tax Credits.
Investment tax credits for renewable energy have been offered for businesses and
residences. In the United States, businesses receive a 10 percent tax credit for
purchases of solar and geothermal renewable energy property, subject to certain
limitations. Some U.S. states have investment tax credits of up to 35%. b.
Accelerated Depreciation. Accelerated depreciation allows renewable energy
investors to receive the tax benefits sooner than under standard depreciation rules.
The effect of accelerated depreciation is similar to that of investment tax credits. In
the United States, businesses can recover investments in solar, wind, and
geothermal property by depreciating them over a period of five years, rather than the
15- to 20-year depreciation lives of conventional power investments. India’s
accelerated depreciation policy allowed 100% depreciation in the first year of
operation, helping spur the largest wind power industry among developing countries.
However, this policy led to large investments without sufficient regard to long-term
operating performance and maintenance, resulting in capacity factors lower than for
wind power installations elsewhere. This led many to conclude that production-based
incentives are preferable to investment tax credits and accelerated depreciation,
although Germany’s investment tax credits accompanied by wind turbine technical
standards and certification requirements avoided the problems found in India. c.
Production Tax Credits. A production tax credit provides the investor or owner of
qualifying property with an annual tax credit based on the amount of electricity
generated by that facility. By rewarding production, these tax credits encourage
improved operating performance. A production tax credit in Denmark provides DK
0.10/kWh (US 1.5 cents/kWh) for wind power, but few other countries have adopted
similar credits. In the United States the Renewable Electricity Production Credit (PTC)
provides a per-kWh tax credit for electricity generated by qualified wind, closed-loop
biomass, or poultry waste resources. Federal tax credits of 1.5 cents/kWh (adjusted
annually for inflation) are provided for the first ten years of operation for all qualifying
plants that entered service from 1992 through mid-1999, later extended to 2001 and
then to 2003. At least five U.S. states have state or local production incentives for
distributed electrical generation, renewable fuels, or both. These policies are similar
to the federal PTC, with specific limits on technologies, dates-in-service, and
maximum payout per provider and per year. Funds to support the incentives are
obtained from a mixture of sources, including general funds, public benefit or
environmental funds, and green electricity sales (so-called “green tags”). d. Property
Tax Incentives. At least 24 U.S. states have property tax incentives for renewable
energy. These incentives are implemented on many scales--state, county, city, town,
and municipality. These are generally implemented in one of three ways:
Renewable energy property is partially or fully excluded from property tax
assessment, renewable energy property value is capped at the value of an
equivalent conventional energy system providing the same service
Tax credits are awarded to offset property taxes. e. Personal Income Tax Incentives.
Credits against personal state income taxes are available in many U.S. states for
purchase of and/or conversion to eligible renewable energy systems and renewable
fuels. In some cases, taxpayers can deduct the interest paid on loans for renewable
energy equipment.ions for eligible renewable energy systems and renewable fuels.
Most exempt 100% of the sales tax for capital expenses, and provide specific centsper-gallon exemptions for renewable fuels. Some policies specify maximum or
minimum sizes for eligible systems. g. Pollution Tax Exemptions. The Netherlands is
an example where “green” power is exempt from a new and rising fossil-fuel tax on
electricity generation that is paid by end-users. Starting in 2001, that fossil-fuel tax
rose to the equivalent of US 5 cents/kWh, providing a large tax incentive for Dutch
consumers. h. Other Tax Policies. A variety of other tax policies exist, such as
income tax exemptions on income from renewable power production, excise duty and
sales tax exemptions on equipment purchased, and reduced or zero import tax duties
on assembled renewable energy equipment or on components. India, for example,
has allowed five-year tax exemptions on income from sales of wind power.
Grants. Many countries have offered grants for renewable energy purchases. For
example, beginning in 1979, Denmark provided rebates of up to 30% of capital costs
for wind and other renewable energy technologies. These rebates declined over time.
In the United States, county and state governments and utilities provide grants for
renewable energy ranging in size from hundreds to millions of dollars.
Loans. Loan programs offer financing for the purchase of renewable energy
equipment. Loans can be market-rate, low-interest (below market rate), or forgivable. 