Family law:
Family law encompasses a wide range of topics related to familial relationships, marriages, and domestic
matters. Here are some key topics within family law:
Marriage:
Divorce:
Child Custody and Support:
Adoption:
Domestic Violence:
Prenuptial and Postnuptial Agreements:
Surrogacy and Assisted Reproduction:
Guardianship:
Estate Planning and Family Law:
Marriage requirements and ceremonies
Annulment
Legal separation
Grounds for divorce
Property division
Alimony or spousal support
Child custody and visitation
Determining custody arrangements
Child support calculations
Parental rights and responsibilities
Adoption process
Termination of parental rights
Protection orders
Legal consequences for perpetrators
Creating and enforcing agreements
Legal considerations for surrogacy
Parental rights in assisted reproduction
Appointing a legal guardian
Responsibilities and rights of guardians
Wills and trusts
Inheritance rights
Juvenile Law:
Parental Rights:
Same-Sex Relationships:
Family Mediation and Dispute Resolution:
International Family Law:
Family Court Procedures:
MARRIAGE UNDER FAMILY LAW:
Family laws cover a wide variety of principles that relate in nature to family affairs, such as marriage,
divorce, succession, etc. There are certain legally enforceable rights that occur when the status of
interpersonal relationships is recognized legally.
The reason for making rules that influence the most private facets of our lives is to guarantee the
protection of individual rights and to maintain those norms that are fundamental to human dignity.
Another explanation is that laws serve as agents of social reform and can boost the status of people in
society.
India is a land of diversity where religion plays an important role in personal and social circumstances.
The origin of family laws as applicable in India can be traced from the basic religious texts of
respective religions for which they have been codified. In India, all personal laws fall within this
domain. In simple words, family law is by and large the codification of relevant portions of basic
religious texts in order to regulate the affairs such as marriage, divorce, adoption, guardianship,
maintenance, etc.
In India, there are five large sets of family laws. They are:
Juvenile delinquency
Dependency and neglect cases
Rights and responsibilities of parents
Legal recognition of same-sex marriages
LGBTQ+ family law issues
Alternative dispute resolution methods
Cross-border custody issues
Recognition of foreign divorces
Filing procedures
Court hearings and proceedings
Hindu law: this law governs all Hindus as well as Buddhists, Jains, and Sikhs
Muslim law: this law governs Muslims.
Christian law: this law governs Christians
Parsi law: this law governs Parsi’s
While the Hindu personal law has undergone changes through a continuous process of codification,
the Muslim personal law has been comparatively untouched by legislations.
In Goa, a uniform civil code is in place as per Article 44 of the Constitution of India, in which all
religions have a common law regarding marriages, divorces, and adoption.
Basic Concept of the Hindu Law
As per Hindu law, marriage is a sacred (Sanskaras) ceremony. As a sacramental union implies that is
a sacrosanct (divine) union. The object of Hindu marriage to have offsprings (children), to be able to
perform religious rites and sacrifices which man can perform only along with his wife and to have
highest conjugal happiness and heavenly bliss for the ancestor and oneself. The achievements of all
these objectives are dependent upon the wife.
There are four major enactments of codified Hindu Law:
Statutory Conditions of Hindu Marriage
Conditions for legitimate Hindu marriage under the Hindu marriage act, 1955 are as follows:
A marriage can be celebrated between any two Hindus, if the following conditions are fulfilled,
namelyThe Sapinda relationship is based on the law of exogamy. The term ‘sapinda’ has been clarified by
Vijaneshwara, who states that ‘pinda’ means ‘body’ and sapindas implies individuals who are
particles of the same body. The Hindu marriage has adopted Vijaneshwara’s philosophy but has
limited the scope of sapinda relationship to 5 degrees in the line of ascent through the father and 3
degrees in the line of ascent through the mother.
Secular law i.e. the Special Marriage Act.
1.  Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
2.  Hindu Succession Act, 1956
3.  Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956
4.  Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956.
1.  Neither side has a partner that resides at the time of marriage;
2.  At the time of marriage neither party,
3.  Is unwilling to provide informed consent to it as a result of unsoundness of mind; or
4.  Though capable of providing rational consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of
such a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of
children; or
5.  Has been exposed to repeated acts of insanity
6.  At the time of marriage, the bridegroom and bride need to be of the age of 21 and 18,
respectively.
7.  The parties are not beyond the boundaries of the forbidden relationship unless the
tradition or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two;
8.  The parties shall not be sapindas of each other unless the tradition or usage governing
each of them permits of a marriage between the two.
Example
Principle: One of the essential conditions for a marriage between any two persons to be solemnized
under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 is that at the time of marriage the male should have attained
the age of twenty-one years and the female should have attained the age of eighteen years. If the
said condition is not met such a marriage is null and void.
Restitution of Conjugal Rights
If your partner has deserted you without providing any fair reasons, the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
provides you remedy in the form of restitution of conjugal rights. The Hindu Marriage Act specifies
that when either the husband or the wife has, without reasonable excuse, withdrawn from the
society of the other, the aggrieved party may apply for restitution of conjugal rights.
What the aggrieved party needs to do is file a petition to the district/ family court and on being
satisfied with the truth of the statements made in such petition that there is no legal ground why
the application should not be granted, the judge may decree restitution of conjugal rights in his/her
favour.
Essential Conditions for claiming a Restitution of
Conjugal Rights
In the first case, one party must have withdrawn from the society of the other; in the second
instance, the removal must be for some fair reason; and in the third position, the aggrieved party
must petition for the restoration of conjugal privileges. After these requirements have been met,
the district court may issue restitution of conjugal rights to cohabitation between the foreign
parties.
If the aggrieved party is unwilling to convince the district court and concludes that the petitioner is
guilty then the decree of restitution of conjugal rights is not issued. An added advantage from this is
that if the parties are not following the decree for cohabitation after the passing of the decree,
continuously for one year, it becomes a ground for divorce.
Void Marriage
A void marriage is no marriage. It is void ab initio i.e. does not exist from the beginning. It is known as
a ‘marriage‘ since two people have gone through the services of marriage, however as they
completely do not have the ability to wed they can’t become a couple. It can neither be appreciated
nor can be it be ratified. The term ‘void‘ can as a rule speech be perceived to be an equivalent of the
word ‘illegal‘. Therefore, something which is void will have one consequence for sure- that it would
be illegal. A void marriage thus means an illegal marriage. Not the question is when would a
marriage be called illegal?
A and B both major, enter into a matrimonial equation with each other with their own approval, and
not without the consent of their parents. Is this marriage considered to be illegal? No, this marriage
is not considered to be illegal simply because the parents of A and B have denied their consent. But
what would be the position if both A and B are already married to say C and D respectively or either
A or B is married to someone else? In such a case, the marriage between A and B would be illegal as
it would not fulfil the conditions for a valid Hindu marriage as prescribed under clause 1 of section
V of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
A marriage is void if based on these grounds
Voidable Marriage
A voidable marriage is a perfectly valid marriage as long as it is not avoided. If one of the partners
does not petition for annulment of marriage the marriage shall remain valid. If one of the parties
dies before the marriage is annulled, no one can challenge the marriage. The parties to a voidable
marriage cannot perform another marriage without first getting a decree declaring their first
marriage as void; otherwise, they will be guilty of bigamy.
Once a voidable marriage is annulled the decree is given retrospective effect from the ‘date of
marriage’.
A marriage is voidable if based on the following grounds
Divorce
Any marriage, whether formalized before or after the commencement of this act, can be dissolved
by order on any of the following grounds on the basis of a petition filed by either husband or wife:
Wife’s Special Grounds of Divorce
1.  Bigamy
2.  The parties are sapindas to each other
3.  Parties are within prohibited degrees of relationship
4.  Essential ceremonies of marriage are not performed.
1.  Impotency
2.  Incapacity to consent and mental disorder
3.  Consent obtained by fraud and force
4.  Pre-marriage pregnancy
1.  Cruelty
2.  Adultery
3.  Desertion for a continuous period of not less than two years
4.  Ceased to be a Hindu by converting to another religion
5.  Incurably of unsound mind
6.  Suffering from a pernicious and incurable type of leprosy
7.  Suffering from venereal disease in a communicable form
8.  Renounced the world by entering any religious order
9.  Not been heard of as being alive for a period of 7 years or more by those who naturally
would have heard of it, had that party been alive.
1.  Bigamy, that is, marrying subsequently during the subsistence of a valid first marriage
2.  Husband proven guilty of rape, sodomy or bestiality
3.  Non-resumption of cohabitation after a decree/order of maintenance
4.  Repudiation of marriage (option of puberty)
Divorce by mutual consent
The Hindu marriage act says that a petition is required to be moved jointly by the parties to
marriage on the ground that they have been living separately for a period of one year or more and
they have not been able to live together and also that they agreed that the marriage should be
dissolved.
Essentials of Divorce by mutual consent
Maintenance
Within the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, right of maintenance applies not only to the wife and
dependent children but also to indigent parents and divorced wives. Allegation of the wife, etc.,
however, rests on the husband possessing sufficient means. Besides the code of criminal procedure,
1973, under Hindu Law, the wife has an absolute right to claim maintenance from her husband.
Although if she deviates from the course of chastity, she loses her right. Her right to maintenance is
enforced in the Hindu Adoption and maintenance act, 1956. In deciding the amount of
compensation, the court takes into consideration different factors like status and liabilities of the
husband. It also judges whether the wife is justified in living apart from her husband. The justifiable
reasons are spelt out in the Act. Maintenance pendente lite (depending on the suit) and even the
burden of a marriage suit would be paid by either the husband or the wife, either the partner having
no separate benefit for his or her support.
Adoption under Hindu Law
Adoption in the Hindus is subject to the Hindu Adoptions Act and after the coming of this Act, all
adoptions must be rendered in accordance with this Act.
As per the Hindu law, the requirements for a valid adoption are that no adoption is valid unless:
Who may adopt?
Capacity of male
Any male Hindu, who is sound mind and is not a minor, had the capacity to take a son or daughter in
adoption. Given that if he has a wife living, he shall not adopt except with the consent of his wife,
unless his wife has fully and permanently renounced the world it has ceased to be a Hindu or has
been declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be of unsound mind. If a person had more
1.  That both the parties have been living separately for a period of one year or more.
2.  That both the parties have not been able to live together
3.  That both the parties have unanimously accepted that their marriage should be
dissolved.
1.  The individual adopting is lawfully worthy of taking part in adoption.
2.  The individual giving in adoption is lawfully worthy of giving in adoption.
3.  The person adopted is legally worthy of being adopted at the time of adoption
4.  The adoption is completed by an actual giving and taking and the ceremony called data
Homam (oblation to the fire) has been performed.
than one wife living at the time of adoption the consent of all the wives is necessary unless the
consent of one of them is unnecessary for any of the reasons specified in the preceding provision.
Capacity of female
Any female Hindu:
Where the woman is married, it is the husband who has the privilege or right to take in adoption
with the permission of his wife.
The person giving the child in adoption has the capacity/right to:
The person can be adopted
No individual can be adopted unless:
Other conditions for a valid adoption are fulfilled
1.  who is of sound mind
2.  who is not a minor, and
3.  (a) who is not married, or who has been married, whose marriage has been broken, or
whose husband is deceased, or has ultimately repudiated the world, or has ceased to be
a Hindu, or has been found unsound by a competent court, has the capacity to adopt a
son or a daughter.
1.  No one, but the father or mother or guardian of the child shall have the capacity to give
the child in adoption.
2.  The father alone, if he is alive, shall have the freedom to give in adoption, but such right
shall not be exercised with only the consent of the mother Unless the mother has
absolutely and fully repudiated the world, or has refused to be a Hindu, or has been
found unsound by a court with competent jurisdiction.
3.  Children may be given in for adoption by the mother if the father is dead or has totally
lastly disavowed the world or has stopped to be a Hindu, or the court of competent
jurisdiction has declared to be of unsound mind.
4.  Where both the parents are either dead or have absolutely and permanently renounced
the world, or have deserted the child, or have been deemed unsound by a court of
competent jurisdiction, or where the parentage of the child is uncertain, the guardian of
the child may, upon adoption, grant the child the prior consent of the court..
1.  The person is a Hindu;
2.  He or she has not been already adopted;
3.  He or she has not been married unless there is a tradition or procedure relevant to the
parties which permit persons who are married being taken in adoption;
4.  He or she has not reached the age of fifteen years unless there is a tradition or norm
applicable to the parties which permit the individual who has completed the age of
fifteen years being taken in adoption.
1.  If the child adopted is a son, the adoptive father or mother by whom the adoption is
made must not have a Hindu son, son of a son or son’s son’s son residing at the time of
adoption;
Basic Concept of Muslim Law
The term ‘Islam’ in Arabic refers to submission to the will of God. The religion is essentially
monotheistic, similar to Jews and Christians. The originator of ‘modern theory of Islamic law’ is
Ignaz Goldhizer. Muslim law or Islamic law is believed to have originated from the divine. The Divine
communicated it to Prophet Muhammad who prescribed it in the Quran. In the latter days, the
followers of Prophet Muhammad (or Muslim jurists) developed and expanded these principles. The
provisions of the Quran are vast and dealt with almost all aspects of human life.
Sources of Muslim Law
Sources of law mean the actual components in which the contents of that law are to be discovered
and made available to the general public. Sources of Muslim law can be categorized into two types:
Main (Shariah) Origins-Primary sources of Muslim law are those that the Prophet himself believed to
be the origins of Muslim law. There are the following:
All of the Muslim personal rules are based on these main sources. They are also known as the
legitimate institutions of Muslim law. They are also sources that are of the highest quality and
importance in their respective order of merit.
The Secondary (Extraneous) Sources – These are those sources which are developments on the
foundations laid down by the primary sources. These are:
These sources clarify and change the primary sources of Muslim personal law in accordance with
the evolving needs of Islamic society.
Concept of Marriage in Muslim Law
2.  If the child being adopted is a girl, the adoptive father or mother by whom the adoption
is rendered must not have a Hindu daughter or son’s daughter residing at the time of
adoption;
3.  If the adoption is by a male and the individual to be received is a male, the assenting
father is in any event 21 years more seasoned than the individual to be embraced;
4.  If the adoption is by a female and the person to be adopted is a male, the adoptive
mother is at least twenty-one years older than the person to be adopted;
5.  The same child should not be taken at the same time by two or more parents; the child to
be adopted must be given and taken at the time of adoption with a view to moving the
child from the family to the time of birth.
The Quran
Sunnah or Hadith (Traditions)
The Ijma and,
Qiyas.
1.  Customs (Urf),
2.  Judicial precedents,
3.  Legislation and
4.  Justice, equity and good conscience.
Muslim marriage by some writers and jurists is treated as a mere civil contract and not a sacrament.
This observation seems to be based on the fact that marriage under Muslim law has similar
characteristics as a contact.
For example: –
Dower
Dower or more is the balance owed by the husband to the wife on the condition of marriage, either
by arrangement between the parties or by statute. It may be either timely or postponed. As per
Wilson, the dower is a consideration for the surrender of a citizen by a woman. It is a formal AngloMohammedan term similar to ‘mehr‘ in Arabic. According to Amir Ali, ‘the dower is a concern that
belongs exclusively to the wife. To quote Mulla dower is a sum of money or other property which
the wife is entitled to receive from the husband in consideration of the marriage.
Divorce
The husband will divorce his wife by denying the union without offering any excuse.
Pronouncements of such words which signify his intention to disown the wife are sufficient.
Generally, this is done by talaaq. But he may also divorce by lla, and zihar which differ from talaaq
only in form, not substance. A wife cannot divorce her spouse on her own accord. She can divorce
the husband only when the husband has given such a privilege to her or under an agreement. Under
an arrangement, a woman can divorce her husband either from Khula or from Mubarat. Before 1939,
a Muslim woman had no right to pursue divorce, except on the basis of false claims or adultery or
foolishness or impotence of her husband.
The dissolution of the Muslim Marriage Act 1939 sets out a variety of other grounds on which a
Muslim woman may have her divorce order enforced through a court order, namely:
1.  A marriage requires proposal (Ijab) from one party and acceptance (Qubul) from the
other so it is the contract. Furthermore, marriage cannot take place without free
agreement and such an agreement cannot be gained through force, deceit or improper
control.
2.  Similar as in the case of contact, entered into by a guardian on attaining majority so can a
marriage contract in Muslim law, be set aside by a minor on attaining the age of puberty.
3.  The parties to a Muslim marriage can enter into any pre-nuptial or post-nuptial
arrangement that is enforceable by law, providing that it is fair and not contradictory to
the doctrine of Islam. The same is valid in the case of a contract.
4.  The terms of a marriage contract may also be alerted within legal limits to suit individual
cases.
5.  While prohibited by both the Holy Quran and Hadith, as well as by every other law,
allowance is also provided for violation of the marriage contract.
6.  In the leading case of Abdul Qadir v/s Salima-1886, the contractual aspect and analogy of
Muslim marriage contract with a contract of sale is emphasized.
That the position of the spouse has not been established for a span of four years;
That the husband has ignored or refused to pay for his upkeep over a duration of two
years; that the husband has been sentenced to jail for a total of seven years;
Family law in India: overview
by Pinky Anand*, Chambers of Ms Pinky Anand
A Q&A guide to family law in India.
The Q&A gives a high-level overview of key issues including jurisdiction and conflict
of law; pre- and post-nuptial agreements and matrimonial property regimes;
divorce, nullity, and judicial separation; children; surrogacy and adoption;
cohabitation; family dispute resolution; civil partnership/same-sex marriage;
controversial areas and reform; and the effect of COVID-19.
This Q&A is part of the global guide to family law.
This global guide is published in association with the International Academy of
Family Lawyers.
Jurisdiction and conflict of law
Regulatory framework
1. What are the primary sources of law in relation to marriage, marital
breakdown and the welfare of children and give a brief overview of which
courts will have jurisdiction to hear the dispute?
Sources of law
Marriage and divorce. India is a secular country and a wide number of religions are
freely practised. The major religions practised include Hinduism, Islam and
Christianity. People solemnise marriages in accordance with religious rituals and
ceremonies, which are mostly codified by statutory personal laws. Therefore, the
matrimonial laws in India, including laws on marriage, divorce and other connected
issues, are essentially governed by the personal laws of the parties depending on
their religion, which are codified by statute in most cases:
That the husband has refused, without a fair excuse, to fulfil his marital duties for a
period of three years;
That the husband was, and appears to be, impotent at the time of the marriage;
That the husband has been insane for a period of two years or is suffering from leprosy or
a pernicious venereal disease;
That she, having been granted in marriage by her father or another guardian before she
reached the age of fifteen years, repudiated the marriage before reaching the age of
eighteen years.
Hindu: Hindu Marriage Act 1955.
Muslim: Muslim marriage is a contract under Muslim law.
Christian: Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872 and the Divorce Act 1869.
In addition, the Special Marriage Act 1954 applies to all persons of all religions. This
is a civil legislation and parties from all religions, caste or community can elect to
marry under it. A divorce would then be governed by the Special Marriage Act
1954.
All these laws apply throughout India.
Welfare of children. Personal laws governing marriage contain provisions to ensure
the welfare of children born in wedlock. There is a general law, the Guardian and
Wards Act 1890, which applies to all communities.
The Guardian and Wards Act 1890 is a complete code defining the rights and
liabilities of guardians and wards. It applies to minor children of any caste and
creed. However, while approving and declaring a person as a minor's guardian, the
court will also consider the minor's personal law. The Guardian and Wards Act
1890 aims to protect the minor child's person and property.
Court system
The Family Court Act 1984 provides for the establishment of Family Courts with a
view to promote conciliation, and secure speedy redressal of disputes relating to
marriage and family affairs, and for matters connected with them. The Family
Courts hear matters relating to marriage, marital breakdown and the welfare of
children. These courts are trial courts and are presided over by Additional District
Judges who undertake trials and review evidence. The Family Courts follow the
Civil Procedure Code. Family proceedings are generally public but can be
conducted in private at the request of the parties or if circumstances require (see
Question 37).
Jurisdiction
2. What are the main requirements for local courts to have jurisdiction in
relation to divorce, property and children proceedings?
Divorce
All Indian matrimonial statutes contain jurisdictional rules. Two matters are
relevant regarding jurisdiction:
Whether a court has jurisdiction depends on the:
Parsi: Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936.
The place in which the petition or suit in a matrimonial cause is filed.
The court in which the petition or suit in a matrimonial cause should be filed.
Parties' domicile.
Jurisdictional requirements are the same under the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 and
the Special Marriage Act 1954. A divorce petition can be presented to the district
court within the local limits of whose original civil jurisdiction the:
The applicability of the Special Marriage Act is not restricted to Indians and foreign
nationals can marry under the Act. The parties need not be domiciled in India to
solemnise their marriage under the Special Marriage Act.
Under the Indian Divorce Act 1869, a petition in a matrimonial cause can be
presented in the court of the district judge within the local limits of whose ordinary
jurisdiction either the:
Where a number of courts have jurisdiction, a party can choose one of them.
Where a court's jurisdiction is questioned, preference is generally given to factors
that support its jurisdiction.
Same-sex spouses and civil partners
Same-sex marriages and civil partnerships are not legally recognised in India.
Property
There is no concept of matrimonial property under Indian law. A woman can
ordinarily claim maintenance and not a right over the property/house in which she
resides. A woman can claim "right to reside" in her matrimonial home under the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005. Cases under this Act can
be filed in the court of the place where the aggrieved woman resides.
Place of solemnisation of marriage.
Marital residence and the residence of the respondent (or, if the respondent
resides outside India, where the petitioner resides).
Marriage was solemnised.
Respondent, at the time of the presentation of the petition, resides.
Parties to the marriage last resided together.
Wife resides on the date of presentation of the petition (if she is the petitioner).
Petitioner resides at the time of the presentation of the petition, in a case
where the respondent, at that time, either:
resides outside the territories to which the acts extend; or
has not been heard of as being alive for a period of seven years or more by
those persons who would naturally have heard of him/her if he/she were
alive.
Husband and wife reside.
Husband and wife last resided together.
Children
Disputes over children are adjudicated by the courts with the closest contact with
the child. Therefore, the court of the place where the child resides will assume
jurisdiction for any disputes over custody and other children-related issues.
Domicile, nationality and habitual residence
3. How do the concepts of domicile, nationality and habitual residence apply
in relation to divorce, financial arrangements, and children?
Domicile
There are two types of domicile:
In relation to domicile by choice, a man's domicile is the place in which he has
decided himself and his family will live, with the intention of making it a permanent
home. The Apex Court has acknowledged the concept of domicile as established
under English law (Central Bank of India Ltd v Ram Narain AIR 1955 SC 36). It held
that the two constituent elements that are necessary under English law for the
existence of domicile are:
An intention of permanent residence proves a change of domicile (Kedar Pandey v
Narain Bikram Sah [1965] 3 SCR 793). The test for establishing change of domicile
is that a person acquires a new domicile when he/she settles in a new country with
the intention of making it his/her permanent home and continuing to reside there
permanently (Louis De Raedt v UOI and others (1991) 3 SCC 554).
The Hindu Marriage Act 1955 extends to the whole of India, and also applies to
Hindus domiciled in the territories to which the Act extends but who are outside of
those territories (section 1(2), Hindu Marriage Act 1955). The Hindu Marriage Act
1955 applies to persons who are not residing in India but continue to be domiciled
in India.
Residence
Domicile by origin. An individual automatically acquires the domicile of the
country in which he/she is born. This remains his/her domicile until and unless
they acquire a new domicile.
Domicile by choice. Domicile of choice is that which the individual has elected
and chosen for himself to replace his/her domicile of origin.
A residence of a particular kind. The residence need not be continuous, but it
must be indefinite and not purely fleeting.
An intention of a particular kind. There must be a present intention to
permanently reside in the country where the residence has been taken up.
The concept of habitual residence is not defined but is recognised by Indian courts.
Indian statutes require residence as a ground for jurisdiction. The Supreme Court
has held that residence, for the purposes of the application of Indian matrimonial
statutes, does not mean a temporary residence but a habitual residence or a
residence which is also intended to be permanent (Smt Satya v Teja Singh [1975] 2
SCR 1971).
The concept of residence is important in India, as the courts to which a divorce
petition under the matrimonial statutes can be presented include place where
either the:
Divorce
In the landmark judgment in Y Narasimha Rao and others v Y Venkata Lakshmi
and others (1991) 3 SCC 451, it was held that marriages that take place in India can
only be dissolved under either the customary or statutory law in force in India.
Therefore, the only law that can apply to matrimonial disputes is the one under
which the parties are married.
However, confusion occurs in relation to parties who are domiciled abroad but
came to India for the sole purpose of solemnisation of marriage. When these
parties, who are domiciled abroad but were married in India under Indian laws,
enter into matrimonial disputes, it is unclear whether the divorce petition is
maintainable in India.
The Supreme Court of India has not adjudicated on this issue. The main view
emerging from the views of the High Courts is that held by the Bombay High Court
that domicile in India is held to be a necessary requirement for the application of
Indian matrimonial statutes (Ms Kashmira Kale v Mr Kishore Kumar Mohan Kale
Writ Petition No 1242 of 2010). However, this view does not bind other high courts.
For the purposes of jurisdiction, Indian domicile of one of the parties is sufficient
to confer jurisdiction on the Indian court.
Children
In relation to child custody, the child's interests and welfare is of primary
importance. The issues regarding child custody are adjudicated by the courts in
whose jurisdiction the child and the person closest with the child resides. Indian
courts can decide on the issue of the custody of a child who is a foreign citizen
only if the child is within the territorial jurisdiction of the Indian courts.
Parties to the petition last resided.
Respondent (or the petitioner if she is the wife) resides.
The Supreme Court of India has held that even where a foreign court has taken a
particular view on any aspect concerning the welfare of a minor, the Indian courts
should objectively and independently review the matter. In Ruchi Majoo vs
Sanjeev Majoo (2011) 6 SCC 479, it was held by the Supreme Court of India that the
judgment by a foreign court should only be taken as input for its final adjudication.
In this case, the Apex Court allowed the trial court in India to hear the mother's
application for custody of the child.
Indian courts believe in the comity of law. However, priority is given to the welfare
of the child.
See also Question 29.
Conflict of law
4. What procedure applies for a party applying to stay proceedings in favour
of a foreign jurisdiction? What factors do local courts take into account when
determining forum issues?
Procedure
A party can apply for a stay of proceedings in favour of a foreign jurisdiction. This is
achieved by making a specific request during the proceeding.
An independent suit to bring an injunction can also be filed under section 39 of the
Specific Relief Act (section 41 outlines when an injunction may be refused). A suit
for an anti-suit injunction can be filed as an independent case before the court of
competent jurisdiction (that is, the Family Court) (see below, Anti-suit injunctions).
Factors
The jurisdiction of more than one court could be invoked where the husband and
wife start to reside in different territories, either nationally or internationally. It
must then be decided which court is best suited and therefore competent to
exercise jurisdiction. The paramount aim should be to alleviate the human suffering
involved in matrimonial disputes. In Modi Entertainment Network and Anr V WSG
Cricket PTE Ltd (2003) 1SCR 480, the Supreme Court of India laid down the
guidelines which should govern the determination of forum issues. These
guidelines provide that:
The defendant, against whom the injunction is sought, is amenable to the
court's personal jurisdiction.
If the injunction is declined, the ends of justice will be defeated and injustice
will be perpetuated.
The principle of comity (respect for the court in which the commencement or
continuance of an action/proceeding is sought to be restrained) must be borne
In cases of multiple forums, the court considers the appropriate forum to be forum
conveniens, having regard to the convenience of the parties and can grant an antisuit injunction in relation to proceedings that are oppressive or vexatious, or in a
forum non conveniens.
Anti-suit injunctions
The remedy available for applying for anti-suit is similar to that as applying for an
injunction in favour of foreign court. A party can apply for an anti-suit injunction
against the other party to prevent him/her from proceeding in any other
jurisdiction. This can be applied for under section 39 of the Specific Relief Act
(section 41 outlines when an injunction may be refused). A suit for an anti-suit
injunction can be filed as an independent case before the court of competent
jurisdiction (that is, the Family Court).
Section 7(1)(d) of the Family Courts Act provides that the family Court has
jurisdiction over a suit or proceeding for an order or injunction in circumstances
arising out of a marital relationship (Jasmeet Kaur v Navtej Singh (2018) 251 DLT
233).
Section 39 of the Specific Relief Act provides that "when ordering mandatory
injunctions, in order to prevent the breach of an obligation it is necessary to
compel the performance of certain acts which the court is capable of enforcing,
the court may in its discretion grant an injunction to prevent the breach
complained of, and also to compel performance of the requisite acts."
Injunction applications must satisfy the conditions provided in section 41 of the
Specific Relief Act. Section 41 provides that an injunction cannot be granted in the
following situations:
in mind.
Where the injunction is to restrain any person from prosecuting a judicial
proceeding that is pending at the institution of the suit in which the injunction
is sought, unless the restraint is necessary to prevent a multiplicity of
proceedings.
Where the injunction is to restrain any person from instituting or prosecuting
any proceeding in a court that is not subordinate to that from which the
injunction is sought.
Where the injunction is to restrain any person from applying to any legislative
body.
Where the injunction is to restrain any person from instituting or prosecuting
any proceeding in a criminal matter.
Where the injunction is to prevent the breach of a contract the performance of
which would not be specifically enforced.
Applicable law
When seeking an anti-suit injunction, an independent case for mandatory
injunction can be filed under section 39 of the Specific Relief Act. The applicant
must satisfy the conditions set out in section 41 (see above, Anti-suit injunctions).
In Dinesh Singh Thakur vs Sonal Thakur (2018) 17 SCC 12, the Supreme Court held
that a foreign court cannot be presumed to be incorrectly exercising its jurisdiction
even where one party can prove that the parties in the present case continue to be
governed by Indian (Hindu) laws in the matter being disputed.
In Vivek Rai Gupta vs Niyati Gupta, (2018) 17 SCC 21, a wife sought to execute the
final decree of divorce and other reliefs passed by a court in Ohio in the US against
any other movable/immovable property in India. The Supreme Court held that it
was open to the husband to resist the execution petition on any grounds available
to him in law when taking the position that such a decree is not executable.
These decisions are in line with the landmark 2003 judgment in Modi
Entertainment Network v WSG Cricket Pte Ltd, (2003) 4 SCC 341, where the
Supreme Court held that the courts in India, like courts in England, are courts of
law and equity. Therefore, anti-suit injunctions are governed by the principles of
equitable relief: Indian courts can issue an anti-suit injunction to a party over
whom it has personal jurisdiction in an appropriate case. This is because the courts
of equity exercise jurisdiction in personam. However, such power must be
exercised sparingly where injunctions are sought.
The principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Modi Entertainment Network
have been applied in the following cases:
Where the injunction is to prevent, on the grounds of nuisance, an act of which
it is not reasonably clear that it will be a nuisance.
Where the injunction is to prevent a continuing breach in which the plaintiff has
acquiesced.
When equally efficacious relief can certainly be obtained by any other usual
mode of proceeding except in case of breach of trust.
When the conduct of the plaintiff or his agents has been such as to disentitle
him to the assistance of the court.
When the plaintiff has a no personals interest in the matter.
Harmeeta Singh v Rajat Taneja 102 (2003) DLT 822.
Nimitt Rai Tiwari v Nishma Ramesh Karia, CS (OS) 304/2010.
Magotteaux Industries Pvt Ltd and others v AIA Engineering Ltd 2008 SCC
OnLine Del 1232/ 155 (2008) DLT 73.
Padmini Hindupur v Abhijit S Bellur 2015 (220) DLT (CN) 14.
5. Are foreign nationals treated differently on divorce?
The Indian courts are competent to adjudicate and grant divorce only under the
Indian statutes. The Indian courts cannot pass orders on cases which require the
applicability of foreign law. However, if a foreign national, who resides in India,
marries under the Special Marriage Act, then such person would not be treated any
differently than an Indian national when seeking divorce. (However, there is no
specific precedent to support this.)
Service of proceedings
6. What are the requirements for service of divorce, financial and children
proceedings in your jurisdiction?
Requirements of service are set out in section 27 and Order V of the Code of Civil
Procedure. The primary method of serving summons is by personal service (that is,
where someone must physically deliver the summons document to the other
person).
The alternative method of service is to affix a copy of the summons on the outer
door (or some other conspicuous part) at the defendant's or respondent's house or
place in which he/she ordinarily resides. If after due diligence the serving officer
unable to locate or trace the person, the serving officer can serve where the
defendant/respondent ordinarily works or carries on his/her business.
In addition to personal service, the court may direct the summons to be served by
registered post at the place where the defendant or his/her agent, where he/she
voluntarily resides, works or carries on his/her business. Furthermore, the Code of
Civil Procedure 1908 was amended in 2002 to include electronic means of service
at Rule 9 and Rule 9A. Electronic means may therefore encompass summons via:
Email. In Central Electricity Regulatory Commission v National Hydroelectric
Power Corporation Ltd (2010) 10 SCC 280], the Supreme Court of India
permitted the service of notice by email along with the ordinary mode of
serving notice. In Ksl and Industries Ltd v Mannalal Khandelwal and the State
of Maharashtra, (Criminal Writ Petition No 1228 of 2004), the Mumbai High
Court held that in order to avoid the delay in legal proceedings, unserved
summons must be interrupted by using all the practical methods and services
available, including emails. Summons through email was also permitted in In
Indian Bank Association & Ors vs Union Of India & Anr (2014) 5 SCC 590.
Whatsapp. In Tata Sons Limited & Ors vs John Does, CS(COMM) 1601/2016, the
High Court of Delhi allowed for summons to be served on the
defendant/respondent via Whatsapp texts in addition to emails. In another
case, the High Court of Delhi allowed a woman to serve a summons on her
estranged husband who was living in Australia, via Whatsapp. Moreover, the
However, use of Whatsapp or email cannot be claimed by the applicant as a matter
of right. It therefore remains at the discretion of the court to grant permission for
service to be allowed via such means.
The following rules apply to service outside of the jurisdiction:
In reality, when serving a notice or summons, practically, one would need to plan
for about four to five months for effecting service of summons in a foreign country.
In civil or commercial matters, some countries (such as Canada or Australia) charge
a fee for serving summons.
India is a signatory to HCCH Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and
Extrajudicial Documents in Civil and Commercial Matters 1965 (Hague Service
Convention). The formal method for service in India, effective from 1 August 2007,
is pursuant to the Hague Service Convention. India has tasked the Ministry of Law
and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs as the Central Authority with receiving
requests for service that come from other contracting states.
Under the Convention, India has made certain declarations, such as the following:
court considered the Whatsapp "double-tick" to be a valid delivery of
summons.
Order V, Rule 25 of the Civil Procedure Code deals with service where the
defendant resides out of India and has no agent.
Order V, Rule 26 provides the procedure of service in a foreign territory
through a political agent or court.
Order V, Rule 26-A provides for summons to be sent to officers of foreign
countries.
The requirement for the authority or competent judicial officer under the law
of the state of origin to forward to the Indian Ministry of Law and Justice both:
the request, in the prescribed format; and
the document to be served (or a copy of the document to be served).
If the request is in the prescribed format, the Ministry of Law will itself serve
the document or will arrange for the document to be served by an appropriate
agency (either using the method prescribed by internal law or using a particular
method requested by the applicant, unless this is incompatible with Indian
domestic law).
The requirement for all requests for service of documents in India to be made
in the English language or accompanied by an English translation.
The part of the request containing the summary of the document to be served
will also be served by the Ministry of Law along with the document.
The applicant will be required to pay or reimburse the costs of employing a
judicial officer or competent person by law, or the costs arising from the
Pre- and post-nuptial agreements and matrimonial property
regimes
Validity of pre- and post-nuptial agreements
7. To what extent are pre- and post-nuptial agreements binding?
The law concerning pre- and post-nuptial agreements is still controversial and not
fully evolved. Marriages are considered to be a sacred alliance that cannot be
broken or dissolved as a civil contract, except with regard to the strict provisions
of the personal laws and civil law.
The concept of a pre- or post-nuptial agreement is not defined in any of the
personal laws. In India, a pre- and post-nuptial agreement is considered to fall into
the category of a contract. Therefore, a legally binding pre-nuptial or post-nuptial
agreement must satisfy the conditions of a valid contract under the Indian
Contract Act 1872 (including that it must not be against public policy).
A prenuptial agreement may be an agreement which sets out terms of settlement
outlining the distribution of assets, liabilities and issues relating to the custody of
children, in the event that the marriage breaks down, which can maybe be relied
upon to put an end to the dispute and for the parties so that they can part ways
amicably. Other matters that are addressed could include:
However, pre-nuptial agreements in India are not binding or executable in a court
of law. The courts may take a prenuptial agreement into consideration for
understanding the intention of the couple and this may help the courts in reaching
a proper settlement in cases for divorce.
particular method of service.
Upon completion of the service by the Ministry of Law, a certificate annexed to
the Convention, will be forwarded to the applicant stating that the document
has been served (containing the method, place and date of service and the
person to whom the document was delivered). (If service cannot be completed,
the certificate must set out the reasons for service being prevented.)
Permanent alimony and maintenance to be provided to wife or husband in case
the marriage fails.
The issue of custody of the children, including the care and maintenance by
both parties and the proportional distribution of responsibility, and the
liabilities of both for any children born to them out of wedlock.
The terms and conditions relating to the financial contribution of self as well
the other partner in marriage.
Courts uphold such agreements where the parties enter into an agreement postbreakdown of marriage, in order to amicably settle family issues.
However, the above view is only applicable for marriages under Hindu law. Muslim
marriages are in the form of legal contract and mahr, which is offered as
consideration to the bride at the time of marriage can be viewed in the same light
as a pre-nuptial agreement.
8. Do matrimonial regimes exist in your jurisdiction and is there a default
matrimonial property regime?
Matrimonial regimes do not exist and are not recognised by the Indian judicial
system.
Default regime
Not applicable.
Procedure
Not applicable.
9. How are foreign separation of property agreements and pre- and postnuptial agreements treated by the courts in your jurisdiction?
Although there is no precedent to this, a foreign separation of property agreement
and pre- and post-nuptial agreement can be construed as legally binding between
parties. In the event that a dispute arises from such an agreement, a remedy can be
sought under contract law, provided all the necessary conditions for a valid
contract were fulfilled.
However, no remedy for such an agreement is available under India's matrimonial
laws.
Divorce, nullity and judicial separation
Recognition of foreign marriages/divorces
10. Are foreign marriages/divorces/civil partnerships recognised?
Marriages
Indian courts recognise foreign marriages conducted under and in compliance with
the laws of a foreign jurisdiction. Couples, residing in India as civil partners,
irrespective of their nationality, can seek a legal remedy under some statutes which
provide protection to women against domestic violence or address custody
related issues. However, they cannot divorce in India, as divorce is available under
the personal matrimonial laws in India which are not applicable to foreigners.
Divorces/annulment
Indian courts recognise divorce/annulment decrees granted by foreign courts.
These decrees by foreign courts are considered to be valid and binding for all
purposes, if they satisfy the conditions provided in section 13 of the Civil
Procedure Code. Divorces granted by a foreign court are recognised in India if they
satisfy the provisions of section 13 of the Civil Procedure Code. A foreign judgment
is conclusive on any matter that has been directly decided on between the same
parties or between parties who are litigating under the same title except where:
(Section 13, Civil Procedure Code.)
Case law
The Supreme Court has held that Indian courts will not recognise a foreign divorce
decree if the divorce petition is not based on the substantive and jurisdictional
grounds provided for divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 and one of the
nine grounds of divorce which must be satisfied (Y Narasimha Rao and others v Y
Venkata Lakshmi and others (1991) 3 SCC 451).
The Supreme Court held that a foreign divorce decree will not be recognised by the
Indian courts where all of the following apply (Y Narasimha Rao and others v Y
Venkata Lakshmi and others (1991) 3 SCC 451):
In Smt Satya v Teja Singh [1975] 2 SCR 1971, the Supreme Court derecognised the
decree of divorce of the foreign country on the ground that one party obtained the
divorce decree by fraud on the foreign court by representing incorrect
It has not been pronounced by a court of competent jurisdiction.
It has not been given on the merits of the case.
It appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded on an incorrect view of
international law or a refusal to recognise the law of India in cases in which that
law is applicable.
The proceedings in which the judgment was obtained are opposed to natural
justice.
It has been obtained by fraud.
It sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in India.
A party only technically satisfies the requirement of residence in a foreign
country with only the purpose of obtaining the divorce.
That party is neither domiciled in that state nor has an intention to make it their
home.
There is no substantial connection with the forum.
jurisdictional facts. The Apex Court held that the concept of residence does not
include temporary residence for the purpose of obtaining a divorce.
It is held that marriages which take place in India can only be dissolved under
either the customary or statutory law in force in India. Therefore, when a foreign
judgment is founded on a jurisdiction or on a ground not recognised by such law, it
is in defiance of the law and is unenforceable in India. For the same reason, such a
judgment is also unenforceable under clause (f) of section 13 of the Civil Procedure
Code, since such a judgment is in breach of the matrimonial law in force in India.
The Supreme Court has also held that "the jurisdiction assumed by the foreign
court as well as the grounds on which the relief is granted, must be in accordance
with the matrimonial law under which the parties are married. The exceptions to
this rule may be:
Civil partnerships
Civil partnerships are not legally recognised in India.
Divorce
11. What are the grounds for divorce?
Divorce
In India, divorce can be obtained by alleging fault of the other party and/or by
mutual consent.
Fault. Dissolution of marriage under all Indian personal laws is based on guilt or
fault theory of divorce (although divorce by mutual consent is also available under
some personal laws (see below, Mutual consent).
Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 recognises nine fault grounds of divorce
with a further four additional fault grounds available to the wife alone under the
Hindu Marriage Act 1955 (section 13(2)).
Where the matrimonial action is filed in the forum where the respondent is
domiciled or habitually and permanently resides, and the relief is granted on a
ground available in the matrimonial law under which the parties are married.
Where the respondent voluntarily and effectively submits to the jurisdiction of
the forum as discussed above and contests the claim, which is based on a
ground available under the matrimonial law under which the parties are
married.
Where the respondent consents to the granting of relief, although the
jurisdiction of the forum is not in accordance with the provisions of the
matrimonial law of the "parties".
Section 2 of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act 1939 contains nine fault
grounds on which the wife alone can sue.
For Christians, subsection 10 of the Indian Divorce Act 1869 contains grounds of
divorce.
The Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936 contains ten fault grounds of divorce on
which either spouse may seek divorce.
Section 27(1) of the Special Marriage Act 1954 contains ten fault grounds of divorce
on which either spouse can seek divorce. Section 27(1A) contains two fault grounds
on which the wife alone can seek dissolution of marriage.
Mutual consent. Under the Indian personal laws, divorce by mutual consent is
recognised under the Hindu Marriage Act 1955, the Special Marriage Act 1954, the
Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1939, the Dissolution of Muslim Marriage Act 1939,
and now also under the Divorce Act 1869.
The only requirement for divorce by mutual consent is that the parties should have
been living separately for a period of one year or more.
Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 provides for divorce by mutual
consent where the parties have been separated for a period of one year.
Thereafter, the first motion for mutual divorce must be filed and presented. After a
period of between six months and 18 months, the parties must present the second
motion. The court will record the parties' statements to ensure that the divorce is
being obtained of free will and only then will it grant the decree of divorce.
Divorce under Islamic law
Under Islamic law, divorce is classified into three categories:
Under Islamic law, only the husband can pronounce talak on his wife, not vice
versa. However, the husband can delegate this power to the wife or any third
person by an agreement. This is known as divorce by delegation (talak-e-tafweez).
Divorce by the husband. There are three types of Talaq:
Talaq. This is divorce at the instance of the husband.
Khula. This is divorce at the instance of the wife.
Mubaraat. This is divorce by mutual consent.
Talaq-e-ahsan. This is a single pronouncement of talaq by the husband,
followed by a period of abstinence (iddat). The duration of the iddat is 90 days
or three menstrual cycles (where the wife is menstruating). Alternatively, the
period of iddat is of three lunar months (in case, the wife is not menstruating).
If the couple resumes cohabitation or intimacy, within the period of iddat, the
pronouncement of divorce is treated as having been revoked. Therefore, talaqe-ahsan is revocable. Conversely, if there is no resumption of cohabitation or
intimacy, during the period of iddat, the divorce becomes final and irrevocable
after the expiry of the iddat period. It is considered irrevocable because the
couple is forbidden to resume marital relationship thereafter, unless they
contract a fresh nikah (marriage) with a fresh mahr (that is, a mandatory
payment, in the form of money or possessions, paid or promised to be paid, by
the groom or by the groom's father, to the bride, at the time of marriage, which
legally becomes her property). However, on the third pronouncement of the
talaq, the couple cannot remarry, unless the wife first marries someone else,
and only after her marriage with other person has been dissolved (either
through talaq (divorce) or death) can the couple remarry. Among Muslims,
talaq-e-ahsan is regarded as the most "proper" form of divorce.
Talaq-e-hasan. This is pronounced in the same manner as talaq-e-ahsan (see
above). However, instead of a single pronouncement there are three successive
pronouncements. After the first pronouncement of divorce, if there is
resumption of cohabitation within a period of one month, the pronouncement
of divorce is treated as having been revoked. The same procedure must be
followed after the expiry of the first month (during which marital ties have not
been resumed). Talaq is then pronounced again: after the second
pronouncement of talaq, if there is resumption of cohabitation within a period
of one month, the pronouncement of divorce is treated as having been
revoked. It is important to note that the first and the second pronouncements
can only be revoked by the husband. If he does so (either expressly or by
resuming conjugal relations) the talaq pronounced by the husband becomes
ineffective, as if no talaq had been expressed. However, if a third talaq is
pronounced, it becomes irrevocable. Therefore, if no revocation is made after
the first and the second declaration, and the husband makes the third
pronouncement, in the third tuhr (period of purity), as soon as the third
declaration is made, the talaq becomes irrevocable, and the marriage stands
dissolved, after which the wife must observe the required iddat (the period
after divorce, during which a woman cannot remarry: its purpose is to ensure
that the male parent of any offspring can be clearly identified). After the third
iddat, the husband and wife cannot remarry, unless the wife first marries
someone else, and only after her marriage with another person has been
dissolved (either through divorce or death), can the couple remarry.
The distinction between talaq-e-ashan and talaq-e-hasan is that, in the
former, there is a single pronouncement of talaq followed by abstinence during
the period of iddat, whereas, in the latter there are three pronouncements of
talaq, interspersed with abstinence.
Talaq-e-biddat. The third type of talaq is talaq-e-biddat. This is effected by
one definitive pronouncement of talaq (such as, "I talaq you irrevocably" or
three simultaneous pronouncements, like "talaq, talaq, talaq", uttered at the
Divorce by the wife. The Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act 1939 sets out the
grounds on which a Muslim woman can seek dissolution of marriage. Section 2 of
the Act provides for grounds for decree for dissolution of marriage, namely that
the:
same time, simultaneously. In talaq-e-biddat, divorce is then effective from
this point onwards. Unlike the other two categories of talaq, the instant talaq is
irrevocable the very moment it is pronounced. The Supreme Court in a recent
landmark decision by five judges in the case of Shayara Bano vs Union of India
(2017) 9SCC 1 (with a majority of 3:2) held that the act of divorce by a Muslim
man by way of uttering the words talak three times is unconstitutional and
illegal. It was held that triple talaq "is not integral to religious practice and
violates constitutional morality".
Whereabouts of the husband has not been known for a period of four years.
(However, any decree passed based on this ground cannot take effect until six
months have passed since making the decree, and if the husband appears
(either in person or through an authorised agent) within this period, and
satisfies the court that he is prepared to perform his conjugal duties, the court
will aside the decree.)
Husband has neglected or has failed to provide for her maintenance for a
period of two years.
Husband has been sentenced to imprisonment for a period of seven years or
upwards. (However, no decree can be passed until the sentence has become
final.)
Husband has failed to perform, without reasonable cause, his marital
obligations for a period of three years.
Husband was impotent at the time of the marriage and continues to be so.
(However, before passing a decree on this ground, the court will, on application
by the husband, make an order requiring the husband to satisfy the court
within a period of one year from the date of such order that he has ceased to
be impotent, and if the husband so satisfies the court within such period, no
decree will be passed based on this ground.)
Husband has been insane for a period of two years or is suffering from leprosy
or virulent venereal disease.
Wife, having been given in marriage by her father or other guardian before she
attained the age of 15 years, repudiated the marriage before attaining the age
of 18 years.
Marriage has not been consummated.
Husband treats the wife with cruelty, for example, the husband:
habitually assaults her or makes her life miserable by cruelty of conduct
even if such conduct does not amount to physical ill-treatment;
associates with women of evil repute or leads an infamous life;
attempts to force her to lead an immoral life;
Nullity
A marriage can only be solemnised between any two Hindus if the following
conditions are fulfilled:
(Section 5, Hindu Marriage Act 1955.)
Only the violation of the prohibition of bigamy and marriage within a prohibited
relationship renders the marriage void. Being underage does not render the
marriage void or voidable. Insanity renders a marriage voidable.
Under the Special Marriage Act 1954 and the Hindu Marriage Act 1955, there is a
distinction between a void and voidable marriage. The Indian Divorce Act 1869
only provides grounds on which marriages are void, but provides no grounds on
which a marriage is voidable. This is the same under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce
Act 1936, although some of the traditional grounds on which a marriage is voidable
have been made grounds of divorce.
Muslim law recognises only void marriages known as batil marriages (that is, a
marriage that does not exist from the outset). There is no concept of voidable
marriage. No court decree is necessary. Even when the court passes a decree, it
merely declares the marriage null and void. Muslim law has a unique concept of
irregular marriage called fasid marriage.
disposes of her property or prevents her exercising her legal rights over it;
obstructs her in the observance of her religious profession or practice;
if he has more wives than one, does not treat her equitably in accordance
with the injunctions of the Quran; or
carries out any other ground recognised as valid for the dissolution of
marriages under Muslim law:
Neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage.
Neither party is mentally impaired or insane at the time of the marriage.
The bridegroom is 18 years or over and the bride 15 years or over at the time of
the marriage.
The parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship, unless the
custom or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the
two.
The parties are not sapindas (that is, lineal ascendants of each other or have a
common lineal ascendant as far as third generation (inclusive) in the line of
ascent through the mother, and the fifth (inclusive) in the line of ascent through
the father, unless the custom or use governing each of them permits a marriage
between the two).
Where the bride is under the age of 18 years, the consent of her guardian in
marriage, if any, has been obtained for the marriage.
A voidable marriage is a valid marriage if it is not avoided. A voidable marriage can
be avoided only on the petition of one of the parties to the marriage.
Judicial separation
All matrimonial statutes, apart from those under Muslim law, contain a provision
for judicial separation.
Hindu law. A wife or husband can file for judicial separation on any of the fault
grounds for divorce stated in section 13(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955, and a
wife can sue for judicial separation on any one of the additional fault grounds in
section 13(2) (section 10, Hindu Marriage Act 1955).
Special Marriage Act 1954. A husband or wife can file for judicial separation on any
of the grounds specified in section 27 (other than the grounds specified in clause (I)
and (j) of section 27 on which a petition for divorce might have been presented or
on the ground of failure to comply with a decree for restitution of conjugal rights)
(section 23, Special Marriage Act 1954).
Divorce Act 1869. The grounds on which a judicial separation decree can be
obtained are adultery, cruelty and two years' desertion.
12. What is the procedure and timeline for divorce?
Divorce
In India, divorce can be sought under any of the available grounds set out in
section 13(1) of the Hindu Marriage Act and section 27 of the Special Marriage Act
(see Question 11). The petition for divorce lodged under any of these provisions
can be contested by the other spouse.
The divorce petition must be filed by either spouse in the Family Court and must
satisfy the conditions for jurisdiction. Once the petition is successfully lodged has
been successfully served on the other side, both parties file their written
pleadings. Upon examination of the evidence and oral/written submissions made
by the parties, the judge will pronounce his/her judgment granting or rejecting the
petition for divorce. The process from petition to disposal takes about two to three
years.
Divorce obtained through mutual consent can be obtained within a minimum of six
months. Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 provides for divorce by
mutual consent where the parties have been separated for a period of one year.
Thereafter, the first motion for mutual divorce must be filed and presented. After a
period of six to 18 months, the parties must present the second motion. The court
will record the parties' statements to ensure that the divorce is being obtained of
free will and only then will it grant the decree of divorce.
Nullity
Nullity of marriage can be sought under section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955
and section 24 of the Special Marriage Act. The procedure and timeline for the
disposal of a nullity is the same as for a divorce petition (see above, Divorce).
Judicial separation
Judicial separation can be sought under section 10 of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955
and Section 23 of the Special Marriage Act 1954. The procedure and timeline for
disposal of a judicial separation is the same as for a divorce petition (see above,
Divorce).
Religious marriage and divorce
13. Are religious marriages and divorces recognised in your jurisdiction?
In India, most marriages are solemnised under the personal law (that is, the religion
of the parties). Personal law based on religion is codified in India and statutes are
available which govern the rights of the parties entering into such a union. India is a
secular country and a variety of religions are practised and recognised, the
majority of which are Hindu, Muslim or Christian.
If the parties choose to marry in accordance with India's secular marriage law, the
Special Marriage Act, the parties' rights will be governed by that statute.
With respect to status of divorce, see Question 11.
Finances/capital and property
14. What powers do the courts have to allocate financial resources and
property on the breakdown of marriage?
Matrimonial laws are lacking in provisions relating to the settlement of the
spouses' properties and the matrimonial home. Section 27 of the Hindu Marriage
Act 1955 provides only for the settlement of property presented jointly to the
husband and wife at or about the time of marriage. It does not address the issue of
settlement of property owned jointly or separately. This is because there is no
concept of matrimonial property and therefore there is no division of assets.
Maintenance is available to the wife as well as the husband as a statutory right on
the breakdown of marriage. The courts have very widely interpreted the term
"maintenance", to allocate financial resources and property to the wife. The courts
have powers to award maintenance under the personal laws, as well as under
section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) and section 20 of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005.
Assets from trusts or companies where the legal title to which is not held by one of
the parties will also be taken into account as a financial resource. The court will
take such assets into account when evaluating the living standards of a party, for
the purposes of making an investment in the name of the wife/child or when
awarding maintenance.
15. What factors are relevant to the exercise of the court's powers?
A wife or the husband is only entitled to be awarded maintenance, permanent or
interim. The quantum of maintenance may vary from case to case and is
determined by the spouse's income. It may usually be up to one-third of the
husband's net income.
It has been held that while considering a claim for interim maintenance, the court
must keep in mind the status of the parties, reasonable wants of the applicant, and
the income and property of the applicant. The requirements of the non-applicant,
the income and property of the non-applicant and the other family members to be
maintained by the non-applicant must also be taken into account. While it is
important to ensure that the maintenance awarded to the applicant is sufficient to
enable the applicant to live in a similar degree of comfort as in the matrimonial
home, it should not be so exorbitant that the non-applicant is unable to pay.
Maintenance awarded cannot be punitive. It should aid the applicant to live in a
similar lifestyle that he or she enjoyed in the matrimonial home. It should not
expose the non-applicant to unjust contempt or other coercive proceedings. On
the other hand, maintenance should not be so low so as to make the order
meaningless.
While estimating the spouse's income or to get an idea of the income and lifestyle
of the parties, the court can take into consideration, the lifestyle of the spouse, the
amount spent at the time of marriage and the manner in which marriage was
performed, any property or properties purchased, any rental income, the amount
spent on fees and other expenses incurred (and so on).
16. What is the court's current position on the division of assets?
There is no concept of division of assets in India. Upon divorce, the spouse is
entitled to claim maintenance. The husband must still, however, provide
for/maintain the wife in accordance with the same status that the wife enjoyed
during the marriage. However, the concept of "maintenance" has been widely
interpreted by the Indian courts.
For details regarding maintenance, see Question 19.
Finances/maintenance (alimony)
17. How does ongoing spousal maintenance operate following marital
breakdown?
Maintenance is available as a statutory right by way of independent relief, both
under civil and criminal laws, and also as an ancillary relief.
Hindus
Maintenance to Hindus is provided for under:
Muslims
A wife is entitled to maintenance from her husband after the breakdown of the
marriage. A divorced woman is entitled to:
(Section 3, Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 1989.)
Christians
Alimony pending the suit of divorce can in no case exceed one-fifth of the
husband's average net income for the three years preceding the date of the order,
and continues until the decree for dissolution of marriage or of nullity of marriage
is made absolute or is confirmed (section 36, Indian Christian Marriage Act 1872).
Section 37, regarding permanent maintenance, states that the court will order the
husband to secure to the wife such gross sum of money, or such annual sum of
Section 24 (maintenance pending suit) and section 25 (permanent alimony and
maintenance) of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955.
Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956.
A reasonable and fair provision and maintenance to be made and paid to her
within the period of iddat by her former husband.
If she maintains the children born to her before or after her divorce, a
reasonable provision and maintenance to be made and paid by her former
husband for a period of two years from the respective dates of birth of such
children.
An amount equal to the sum of mahr or dower agreed to be paid to her at the
time of her marriage or at any time after that according to Muslim law.
All the properties given to her before or at the time of marriage or after the
marriage by her relatives, friends, husband and any relatives of the husband or
his friends.
money, for any term not exceeding her own life, to the satisfaction of the court,
after holding in consideration all of the following:
There is a provision for interim and permanent maintenance. The right to claim
maintenance extends until remarriage.
The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 1989 was enacted to
codify and regulate the obligations of the Muslim husband to pay maintenance to
the divorced wife. However, a controversy arose as to the time period for which a
Muslim husband is obliged to pay maintenance to the divorced wife. The Supreme
Court in the judgment of Danial Laitifi v Union of India AIR 2001 SC 3958, held that
a Muslim husband is liable to make reasonable and fair provision for the future of
the divorced wife, which obviously includes her maintenance. Such a reasonable
and fair provision extending beyond the iddat period must be made by the
husband within the iddat period in terms of section 3(1)(a) of the Muslim Women
(Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 1989.
The liability of a Muslim husband to his divorced wife arising under section 3(1)(a)
of the Act to pay maintenance is not confined to the iddat period.
A divorced Muslim woman who has not remarried and who is not able to maintain
herself after the iddat period can proceed as provided under section 4 of the
Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act 1989 against her relatives,
who are liable to maintain her in proportion to the properties which they inherit on
her death, according to Muslim law, including her children and parents. If any of
the relatives are unable to pay maintenance, the magistrate may direct the State
Wakf Board, established under the Act, to pay that maintenance.
18. Is it common for maintenance to be awarded on marital breakdown?
Maintenance is commonly awarded in favour of the wife or the husband (as
applicable) on marital breakdown.
19. What is the court's current position on maintenance on marital
breakdown?
The husband must provide for/maintain the wife in accordance with the same
status that the wife enjoyed during the marriage. However, the concept of
"maintenance" has been widely interpreted by the Indian courts.
There is no set formula for fixing the amount of maintenance. The award of
maintenance will therefore depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
The wife's fortune (if any).
The ability of the husband to pay.
The conduct of the parties.
The court is required to consider certain specific factors, however, such as the
status of the parties, the parties' respective needs, the capacity of the husband to
pay having regard to his reasonable expenses for his own maintenance and to
those the husband is to provide (both in relation to payments he is legally obliged
to make as well any involuntary payments or deductions) (Jasbir Kaur Sehgal v
District Judge, Dehradun and others (1997) 7 SCC 7).
The amount of maintenance for the wife should be fixed so she can live in
reasonable comfort taking into consideration her status and the standard of living
she was accustomed to when she was living with her husband. However, the
amount fixed cannot be excessive or extortionate (Jasbir Kaur Sehgal v Dist Judge,
Dehradun (1997) 7 SCC 7).
In Sh Bharat Hegde v Smt Saroj Hegde, 140 (2007) DLT 16 the High Court of Delhi
observed that the relevant considerations to be taken into account at the time of
assessing maintenance claims are the:
Equally, as is often the case, some guesswork is used when estimating the income
of the non-applicant, if there is undisclosed or incorrect disclosed information.
A wife/aggrieved woman can only claim the right to reside in the matrimonial home.
In the recent case of Aishwarya Atul Pusalkar v Maharashtra Housing & Area
Development Authority and Others (Civil Appeal No 7231 of 2012), decided on 27
April 2020, the Supreme Court recognised the woman's right to reside in her
matrimonial home and held that such right has a legitimate basis. The Supreme
Court ruled that, subsequent to her marriage, a married woman has an entitlement
to live with the rest of her family members (on the husband's side) when the
property is owned on a joint basis. If the wife resides in accommodation as an
independent family unit with her husband and children, the matrimonial home
would be that residential unit. The Supreme Court ruled this right to reside in
matrimonial home is embedded in her right as a wife. Such right is also implicit in
section 18 of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act 1956 where such statue is
applicable.
Status of the parties.
Reasonable wants of the claimant.
Independent income and property of the claimant.
Number of persons the non-applicant has to maintain.
Amount that should aid the applicant to live in a similar lifestyle as he or she
enjoyed in the matrimonial home.
Non-applicant's liabilities.
Provision for food, clothing, shelter, education, medical attendance, treatment
and so on of the applicant.
Payment capacity of the non-applicant.
The right to residence has also been recognised under the Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act 2005 and by the Supreme Court in SR Batra v Taruna
Batra (2007) 3 SCC 169.
In Shamima Farooqui v Shahid Khan (2015) 5 SCC 705, the Supreme Court of India
held that the husband is under a higher obligation when the question of providing
maintenance to the wife and children arises. In the case, it was held that it is the
obligation of the husband to maintain his wife. The husband cannot be permitted
to plead that he is unable to maintain the wife due to financial constraints as long
as he is capable of earning.
Child support
20. What financial claims are available to parents on behalf of children within
or outside of the marriage?
In India, the obligation of a parent to maintain a child outside the marriage is same
as the obligation to maintain the child born within the marriage. The law does not
differentiate between a legitimate and an illegitimate child.
The parent with custody of the child can file for maintenance on behalf of the child
in the capacity as legal guardian. Such parent can seek maintenance in the form of
monthly allowance, which would cover the child expenditure on education, food,
clothing and clothing. Maintenance is usually awarded on a monthly basis. The
parent can also seek maintenance in form of a lump sum figure, which is usually
deposited in the form of a fixed deposit in the bank for the purposes of the child's
higher education or marriage expenses.
To further a claim of maintenance, financial claims in the form of capital (to include
transfer of property) can be made. The courts may grant security of property to
secure the claim of maintenance.
Indian laws provide the same rights and claims to children whose parents have
never married as those available to children born within a marriage.
21. On what basis is child maintenance calculated?
If a person with sufficient means, neglects or refuses to maintain his legitimate or
illegitimate minor child (whether married or not) or neglects or refuses to maintain
his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has attained
majority, and the child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury,
unable to maintain itself, a magistrate can order him to make a monthly allowance
for the maintenance of his child (section 125, CrPC). Section 125 CrPC can be
enforced only against men (obligations for women are provided for in different
statutes).
A Hindu father or a Hindu mother is under a statutory obligation to provide
maintenance to their children (Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956). The
obligation to maintain the children is shared equally by the mother and father.
However, with the social set up in India, the father is called upon to primarily
maintain the children as he is still considered to be the primary breadwinner for
the family. In a situation where the father has no means or insufficient means, the
mother is therefore under an obligation to provide maintenance.
It has been held that, in determining the amount of maintenance to be awarded to
children, regard must be had to the position and status of the parties and the
reasonable needs of the child.
Section 3(b) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956 provides that
maintenance includes in all cases the provision for food, clothing, residence,
education and medical attendance and treatment (plus where there is an
unmarried daughter, all reasonable expenses related to her marriage). Section 3(c)
provides that a "minor" is a person who has not reached the age of 18 years (see
Question 22). Under section 20 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956,
a Hindu is bound, during his/her lifetime, to maintain his/her children. A minor
child, provided he/she is a minor, is entitled to claim maintenance from his/her
father or mother (see Question 23). Under section 20, it is as much the father's
obligation to maintain a minor child as it is the mother's obligation.
22. What is the duration of a child maintenance order (up to the age of 18
years or otherwise)?
Ordinarily, an order of maintenance would end when the child attains the age of
majority (18 years of age) but if the welfare of the child so requires, it may be
continued beyond it, particularly when the child is engaged in higher education.
In Jagdish Jugtawat v Manjulata and others (2002) 5SCC 422, it was held that a
female child has a right to be maintained by her parents even after she attains
majority.
Under the Mohammedan law (Islamic law) a father is bound to maintain his sons
until they have attained the age of puberty. He is also bound to maintain his
daughters until they are married.
In Amarendra Kumar Paul v Maya Paul and others (2009) 8 SCC 359, the Supreme
Court held that an application for grant of maintenance under section 125 of the
CrPC, can be continued up until the child reaches majority. Therefore, once the
child attains majority, section 125 would cease to apply.
23. Can a child (whether of legal maturity or otherwise) make a claim directly
against their parents?
A minor, in his/her individual capacity, can make a claim against his/her parents.
However, the minor child must approach the court through a legal guardian.
A child who has attained the age of majority (that is, over the age of 18 years) can
make a claim directly against his/her parents. However, a claim for maintenance
would only be successful if made for the purposes of higher education or marriage
expenses. A child whose has attained the age of majority may, however, seek civil
remedy in the form of seeking his/her share in the joint family property (as
applicable).
In India, a Hindu child (male or female) acquires a right in the undivided family
property, by virtue of birth. The child is entitled to such share in the property by
virtue of being a coparcenar and can therefore seek his/her share in the undivided
family property.
Enforcement of financial orders
24. What are the main methods of enforcement to ensure compliance with
financial orders following divorce/dissolution in your jurisdiction?
Part II (sections 36 to 74) and Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code provide for the
execution of decrees and orders. In this context, "execution" is the process by
which the court's judgement is brought into effect, allowing for the implementation
or giving effect to the order passed by the court.
Where one party fails to comply with the requirements of the execution following
divorce/dissolution, a contempt petition may be filed by the other party. Such
person may even be arrested if contempt is proved.
25. What is the legal position on the reciprocal enforcement of financial
orders?
Foreign orders/decrees/judgments cannot be directly executed in India unless they
are the judgments of courts in "reciprocating territories". In all other cases, the
only mode of giving effect to a foreign judgment is to file a suit on the judgment in
an appropriate Indian court, which has to be tested by section 13 of the Civil
Procedure Code (CPC).
Decrees passed by courts in a reciprocating territory may be executed in India,
subject to the following conditions:
Where a certified copy of decree of any of the superior courts of any
reciprocating territory has been filed in a district court, the decree may be
executed in India as if it had been passed by the district court. "Reciprocating
territory'' means any country or territory outside India which the central
government may, by notification in the official Gazette, declare to be a
(Section 44A, CPC.)
Financial relief after foreign divorce proceedings
26. What powers are available to the court to make orders following a foreign
divorce? If such a power exists, what is the legal basis for making such an
application?
There do not appear to be any decision on the subject of rights of an Indian court
to make orders following a foreign order of divorce or annulment of marriage.
However, in our opinion, where a particular relief is available to a party under a
matrimonial statute, and the same has been adjudicated by the foreign court, the
party would not have a right to approach the Indian court again on the same issue.
However, where the issue of financial orders has not been decided by a foreign
court or the order of the foreign court is hit by the provisions of section 13 of the
Civil Procedure Code, it may be adjudicated in appropriate proceedings in India.
Independent legal remedies are available to parties seeking financial relief under
the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956.
Children
Custody/parental responsibility
27. What is the legal position in relation to custody/parental responsibility
following the breakdown of a relationship or marriage?
reciprocating territory for the purposes of section 44. "Superior courts", with
reference to any reciprocating territory, means such courts as may be specified
in the notification.
Together with the certified copy of the decree, a certificate shall be filed from
such superior court stating the extent, if any, to which the decree has been
satisfied or adjusted, and that certificate shall, for the purposes of proceedings
under section 44, be conclusive proof of the extent of such satisfaction or
adjustment. "Decree", with reference to a superior court, means any decree or
judgment of such court under which a sum of money is payable (not being a
sum payable in respect of taxes or other charges of a like nature or in respect to
a fine or other penalty), but shall in no case include an arbitration award, even
if such an award is enforceable as a decree or judgment.
The provisions of section 47 will, as from the filing of the certified copy of the
decree, apply to the proceedings of a district court executing a decree under
this section, and the district court must refuse execution of any such decree if
it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the decree falls within any of
the exceptions specified in clauses (a) to (f) of section 13.
There is no standard formula that is applied in relation to custody/parental
responsibility following the breakdown of a relationship or marriage. The most
important principle governing the decisions of the courts in relation to children is
the best interest and welfare of the child.
Generally speaking, the mother has a preferential right to the custody of an infants
below the age of five years and female children. However, where the court upon
substantial evidence reaches the conclusion that the mother cannot secure the
best interest and welfare of the child, the primary custody of infants can be
entrusted to fathers.
28. What is the legal position in relation to access/contact/visitation following
the breakdown of a relationship or marriage?
The courts in India are highly favourable in permitting access/contact/visitation,
following the breakdown of a relationship or marriage to the parent who does not
have custody of the child. It is settled law that a child should not miss out on the
love and affection of both the parents as a result of breakdown of marriage.
Depending on the facts and circumstances of the case, the courts may permit,
weekly, fortnightly or overnight visitation. The court may also permit sharing of the
holidays between the parents.
International abduction
29. What is the legal position on international abduction?
India has recently witnessed an alarming number of cases involving cross-border
child abduction.
India, not being a signatory to the HCCH Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction 1980 (Hague Child Abduction Convention), is not
under an obligation to return the child to the country from which the child had
been wrongfully removed. However, recently the Supreme Court of India has held
that, where children have been wrongfully removed from the jurisdiction of foreign
countries to which they belong, the principle of comity of nations would apply and
the parties should be sent back to the jurisdiction of the court that had the most
intimate contact. The courts in that country should conclusively adjudicate the
issue of custody.
Dr V Ravi Chandran v Union of India and others (2010) 1 SCC 174 is a
groundbreaking case in which the mother and father lived in the US and litigated in
the US court, leading to a consent order regarding their child. Subsequently, the
mother came to India with the child in violation of the US court order and was
untraceable. In this case, the Supreme Court directed the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) to find the child as the mother had been fleeing from the course
of justice. The Supreme Court of India held that the US court was the only
competent court to adjudicate any disputes relating to the child and, if the mother
had any grievance, she could seek modification of the consent order in the US
court. The Supreme Court explicitly ordered that if the parties did not return to the
jurisdiction of the US courts within the stipulated time to settle their disputes
regarding child custody, the child would be handed over to the petitioner father.
However, the case continued. The mother sought an extension of time to return to
the jurisdiction of the US courts for obtaining her visa, but thereafter was
untraceable. The Supreme Court again directed the CBI to trace the child. This time
after the child was traced, the Supreme Court directed the CBI to hand over the
child to the father. The child was recovered by CBI in Chennai and handed over to
the father and they returned to the jurisdiction of US courts.
When dealing with a case of custody of a child removed by a parent from one
country to another in contravention of the orders of the court where the parties
had set up their matrimonial home, it has been held that the court in the country to
which child has been removed must first consider the question of whether the
court should either:
In Arathi Bandi V Bandi Jagadrakshaka Rao and others (2013) 15 SCC 790, the
Supreme Court followed its ratio in the judgment of Dr V Ravi Chandran. In this
case, it was held that no relief could be granted to the parent whose conduct
involves removing the child from the foreign country to India in defiance of the
orders of the court of competent jurisdiction. The Supreme Court specifically
approved the modern theory of conflict of laws, which prefers the jurisdiction of
the state which has the most intimate contact with the issues arising in the case.
In Nithya Anand Raghavan v State of NCT (2017) 8 SCC 454, the Supreme Court
dismissed a petition seeking the child's return to the foreign country. The Court
held that Indian courts are not prohibited from declining the relief to return a child
to his/her native state merely due to a pre-existing order from a foreign court of
competent jurisdiction. However, this should be considered on a case-by-case
basis (whether by a summary inquiry or an elaborate inquiry). The Supreme Court
reiterated that the exposition in the case of Dhanwanti Joshi is good law and has
been quoted with approval by a three-judge bench of this Court in Dr V Ravi
Chandran. The Court also approved the view taken in the case of Dhanwanti Joshi,
which was for countries that are not signatory to the Hague Child Abduction
Convention, the applicable law will be the law of the country to which the child is
removed, while taking into account the welfare of the child as paramount
Conduct an elaborate enquiry on the question of custody.
Summarily order a parent to return custody of the child to the country from
which the child was removed and that all aspects relating to child's welfare be
investigated in a court in their own country.
importance. Therefore, the order of the foreign court will only be one factor
(among others) to be taken into consideration.
Summary jurisdiction to return the child can only be exercised where the child had
been removed from his/her native land and removed to another country where (as
applicable):
In addition, summary jurisdiction can only be exercised if the court to which the
child has been removed is moved promptly and quickly. The overriding
consideration must be the interests and welfare of the child.
In Lahari Sakhamuri v Sobhan Kodali (2019) 7 SCC 311, the Supreme Court of India
reiterated the importance of the best interest and welfare of the child, and that the
direction to return the child to the foreign jurisdiction must not result in any
physical, mental, psychological, or other harm to the child. Further, the court
stipulated that this principle could not be overridden by the following:
However, in the facts of this case, the court held that upholding the best interests
of the children would be established by their return to the US. This was so that
they were able to enjoy their natural environment with the love, care and attention
of their parents and grandparents, and to resume their schooling. Both the minor
children, from the very inception of their birth, until their removal, were living with
their parents in US. Leave to remove/applications to take a child out of the
jurisdiction.
In a globalised world where adults marry and shift from one jurisdiction to another,
there are increasing issues of jurisdiction as to which country's courts will have
jurisdiction. In many cases, the jurisdiction may vest in two countries. The issue is
important and needs to be dealt with care and sensitivity. Although the best
interests of the child are extremely important (in fact, of paramount importance),
the courts of one jurisdiction should respect the orders of a court of competent
jurisdiction even if such court is outside its territory. It is well settled law that,
when deciding matters regarding the custody of a child, the primary and
The child's native language is not spoken.
The child gets divorced from the social customs and contacts to which he/she
has been accustomed.
The child's education in his/her native land is interrupted and he/she is being
subjected to a foreign system of education.
Doctrines of comity of courts.
Intimate connections.
Orders passed by foreign courts having jurisdiction in matters regarding
custody of the minor child.
Citizenship of the parents and the child.
paramount consideration must be the child's welfare. Therefore, if the welfare of
the child so demands, objections based on legal technicalities cannot stand in its
way. It has been observed that various factors must be taken into consideration
when deciding what is best in the interest of the child. No hard and fast rules can
be laid down and each case must be decided on its own merits. The court must
decide what is in the best interest of the child after weighing all the pros and cons
of both the respective parents claiming custody of the child.
Keeping in view the importance of mediation and protecting the best interests of
the child, the Ministry of Women and Child Development directed the National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) to establish the Mediation Cell.
The purpose of the Mediation Cell is to resolve cases where children have been
taken out of the jurisdiction by a spouse without the permission of the other
spouse due to marital discord or domestic violence from other jurisdictions or vice
versa and to prepare parental plans that take into account the best interests of the
child. The Mediation Cell develops the parental plan by contacting the concerned
parties in person or via video conferencing, in an attempt to resolve the matter
through mutual consent. Following the mediation process, the Mediation Cell
provides the report to the Integrated Nodal Agency (INA), which will either refer
the case back to the Mediation Cell (in a further attempt to resolve the matter) or
will make a final order on the basis of a report from the NCPCR. So far, the
Mediation Cell has successfully intervened in 12 disputes relating to international
parental child abduction.
In addition, a separate Non-resident Indian (NRI) Cell has also been established to
deal with issues relating to marriages of NRIs. The NRI Cell receives and processes
all complaints related to Indian women who have been deserted by their overseas
Indian husbands and provides assistance (including conciliation and mediation
between the parties and advising the complainant on any related issues).
Leave to remove/applications to take a child out of the jurisdiction
30. What is the legal position on leave to remove/applications to take a child
out of the jurisdiction? Under what circumstances can a parent apply to
remove their child from the jurisdiction against the wishes of the other
parent?
Both parents are assumed to be the natural custodians of their child. Therefore,
there is no bar against a parent removing the child from the jurisdiction against the
wishes of the other parent. It is only necessary for a parent to seek permission of
the court to remove the child from the jurisdiction where either:
Such action is objected to by the other parent.
There is a restraining order of the court.
Matters relating to family and custody are considered to be of a civil nature.
Therefore, even in a case of child abduction by one parent, the matter is
considered to be of a civil nature and, unlike in Western countries, arrest warrants
are not issued. In cases of child abduction, the other parent has remedy in the
form of filing a writ of habeas corpus or by seeking relief of restoration under the
Guardians and Wards Act 1890.
Surrogacy and adoption
Surrogacy agreements
31. What is the legal position on surrogacy agreements in your jurisdiction? Is
surrogacy available to individuals and cohabiting couples (both heterosexual
and same-sex)?
The following types of surrogacy are practised in India:
In India, surrogacy is permitted for lack of legislation on the subject yet. Although
the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has set "national guidelines" to
regulate surrogacy, these are simply guidelines. These guidelines were made in
2005 and regulate assisted reproductive technology (ART) procedures. The 2005
Guidelines are limited in scope and although they provide that surrogate mothers
must sign a "contract" with the childless couple, there are no provisions for an
event where the "contract" is violated and what the rights of a child born from
such arrangement would be.
Case law
The Supreme Court, as seen in its line of judgments, has been pro-surrogacy and
also pro-contract.
In the landmark case of Baby Manji Yamada v Union of India (2008) 13 SCC 518,
the view of the Supreme Court was not only pro-surrogacy, but also extremely procontract. Baby Manji was a surrogate child of a Japanese couple who were having
legal difficulties getting a visa for the child born in Gujarat. The Supreme Court of
India gave custody of the child to the surrogate grandmother. The Supreme Court
The matter adjudicating child custody is pending in the court.
The court has passed an order granting one parent the exclusive custody of the
child.
Paid surrogacy, which involves a commercial agreement between the
commissioning couple and the woman who agrees to bear the child.
Altruistic surrogacy, where the surrogate receives no financial reward for
bearing or relinquishing the child.
of India held that commercial surrogacy is permitted in India, and therefore there
is manifold increase in international confidence in surrogacy in India.
In another matter of Jan Balaz v Anand Municipality AIR 2010 GUJ 21, a German
couple entered into a contract with a surrogate mother and two children were
born. The question which arose was whether a child born in India to a surrogate
mother, an Indian national, whose biological father is a foreign national, would get
citizenship in India, by virtue of birth. This was a momentous question which had
no precedent in India. The High Court of Gujarat, keeping in view the findings of the
Supreme Court in Baby Manji's case, held that this case is primarily concerned with
the relationship of the child with the gestational surrogate mother, and with the
donor of the ova. In the absence of any legislation to the contrary, the High Court is
more inclined to recognise the gestational surrogate who has given birth to the
child.
The facts of this case are unusual because the petitioner was a German national
and was the biological father of two babies given birth to by a surrogate mother
who was an Indian citizen. The petitioner's wife was a German national. The
petitioner and his wife were both working in the UK at the time and wanted to stay
there. The petitioner and his wife had entered into a surrogacy agreement with the
surrogate mother. Further, the surrogate mother had also agreed that she would
not take any responsibility for the wellbeing of the child, the biological parents
would have a legal obligation to accept the child that the surrogate mother would
deliver, and the child would have all inheritance rights of a child of biological
parents under the prevailing law. The surrogate mother gave birth to two baby
boys.
On birth, an application for passports was made in India. The petitioner's name was
shown as the father and the surrogate mother's name was shown as the mother.
The Regional Passport Office asked for the passports back and issued a certificate
of identification. The father submitted that Germany would never recognise the
babies as their citizens, so he filed a writ petition stating that the denial of
passports to the children violated Article 21 (right to life) of the Indian
Constitution.
The High Court held that this case was primarily concerned with the relationship of
the child with the gestational surrogate mother, and with the donor of the ova. In
the absence of any legislation to the contrary, the Courts were more inclined to
recognise the gestational surrogate who has given birth to the child as the natural
mother. She has a right to privacy that forms part of right to life and liberty
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Nobody can compel her to
disclose her identity. Babies born are not in a position to know who the egg donor
is and they only know their surrogate mother who is real. The wife of the biological
father, who has neither donated the ova, nor conceived or delivered the babies,
cannot in the absence of legislation be treated as a legal mother and she can never
be a natural mother. The Gujarat High Court held that, by providing ova, a woman
will not become a natural mother, as life does not take place in her womb, nor does
she receive the sperm for fertilisation.
In the present legal framework, the High Court held that the courts have no other
option but to hold that the babies born in India to the gestational surrogate are
citizens of this country and therefore, are entitled to receive passports. It directed
the Passport Authorities to release the passports immediately.
It is clear that in the case of Jan Balaz, the contract proved to be insufficient in
demarcating the rights of the parties and also brought out residual issues such as
citizenship and identity that are matters of vital importance to the children but do
not have a place in the surrogacy agreement.
In both the above cases (Baby Manjhi and Jan Balaz), the Indian courts have taken
a very pro-contract stand, possibly as a way of encouraging commercial surrogacy,
which contributes millions of dollars to India's economy. However, it seems from
the above that the Indian Contract Act in its current form is not able to quite
comprehend the complex questions and requirements that surround surrogacy
and surrogacy agreements. Unlike most contracts that deal with the inanimate,
which indirectly has an impact on the lives of human beings, the main entity being
given for consideration here is a human child. What actually defines breach of a
surrogacy agreement is not provided anywhere in the Indian Contract Act, making
it easier for certain parties to evade liability and accountability, which will leave
the innocent child unprotected and vulnerable. In light of the above-mentioned
arguments it becomes clear that more than an issue of contract, commercial
surrogacy is an issue of rights, mainly the rights of the intending parents, the rights
of the donors, the rights of the surrogate mother and last but definitely not least,
the rights of the child. It is also an issue of human rights because of the cramped
and heavily controlled living conditions of the surrogate mother.
Issues such as whether the parent country of the commissioning couple recognises
and accepts the citizenship of the surrogate child are of great importance, since
the Citizenship Act of India does not accord citizenship to a child born out of
surrogacy and such matters can leave the child without citizenship where
citizenship is denied from both countries. For example, neither Japan nor Germany
recognise surrogacy and therefore will not grant citizenship to a surrogate child
born in India. This was evidenced in the Baby Manji Yamada case and the Jan
Balaz case (see above).
It should be noted that the judgment in Jan Balaz has been appealed to the
Supreme Court of India.
Legal instruments for surrogacy
Assisted Reproductive Technology Regulation Bill. In February 2020, the Union
Cabinet approved the Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) Regulation Bill
2020, to monitor the medical procedures used in India that assist in achieving
pregnancy. The ART Regulation Bill will regulate India's assisted reproductive
technology (ART) services with the aim of helping infertile couples to feel more
ensured/confident of the ethical practices in relation to ART services.
ART has made some significant steps forward over the past few years and India has
seen some of the highest growth in the number of ART centres and ART cycles
performed each year. The select committee that examined the Surrogacy
Regulation Bill 2019 Opens in a new windowhas said that it would be prudent to bring
the ART Bill before the Surrogacy Bill 2019, to establish a regulatory mechanism for
ART clinics. The ART Regulation Bill is intended to be more overarching and a first
step in regulating the sector.
Some key features of the Art Regulation Bill include requirements for safe and
ethical ART, mandatory pre-genetic implantation testing, and the establishment of
a national regulatory board and state level regulatory boards for ART.
Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill 2020. The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill 2016 was
introduced in Lok Sabha on 21 November 2016. It was examined by the Standing
Committee on Health and Family Welfare which submitted its report on 10 August
2017. The Committee gave several recommendations with regard to:
However, the 2016 Bill lapsed with the dissolution of the 16th Lok Sabha. The
Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill 2019 was therefore introduced in Lok Sabha on 15 July
2019 to replace the 2016 Bill. Some key features of the Art Regulation Bill include
new regulatory of surrogacy (allowing for altruistic surrogacy and prohibiting
commercial surrogacy), an outline of permitted purposes for carrying out
surrogacy, specific eligibility criteria for intending couples and surrogate mothers,
rules for parentage and abortions of surrogate children, and the establishment of
national and state surrogacy regulation boards. The Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill also
establishes certain offences related to surrogacy, including the offence of:
Commercial v altruistic surrogacy.
The implications of the surrogate being a close relative.
The inclusion of provisions for gamete donation.
Regulation of abortion.
Undertaking or advertising commercial surrogacy.
Exploiting the surrogate mother.
Selling or importing human embryo or gametes for surrogacy.
Abandoning, exploiting or disowning a surrogate child.
These offences are sanctioned with a fine of up to INR1 million and imprisonment
of up to ten years.
The 2019 Surrogacy (Regulation) Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 5 August
2019, but was referred to a select committee by the Upper House after members
raised certain concerns with the proposed legislation in its current form (for
example, only allowing altruistic surrogacy with a near relative, rules preventing
single woman, and the definition of infertility).
Accepting the recommendations from the parliamentary select committee, on 26
February 2020 the Government of India amended the Bill to allow a "willing
woman" and not just a "close relative" to become a surrogate mother and proposed
widowsOpens in a new window and divorced women to also be eligible to benefit
from its provisions in addition to infertile Indian couples. The proposed insurance
cover for a surrogate mother was also increased to 36 months (from 16 months
previously). However, only Indian couples, with both intending partners of Indian
origin, can opt for surrogacy in the country.
The Surrogacy Regulation Bill was likely to be tabled in the second half of the
budget session beginning March 2020 but has since been postponed due to the
2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Adoption
32. What is the legal position in relation to adoption? Is adoption available to
individuals and cohabiting couples (both heterosexual and same-sex)?
An adopted child, once all the legal formalities are satisfied, acquires the same
rights as a biological child.
Since a large number of Indian children are available for adoption, a number of
foreign countries started looking at India for adoption. The Guardian and Wards Act
1890 is a statute which protects the rights and interests of children, but this does
not provide for adoption. This legislation provides that a person can become a
guardian of a child, which for all purposes is akin to adoption, but not a parent.
Adoption is also governed by the personal law of the parties.
Adoption of orphaned, abandoned and surrendered children in India is governed
by a set of guidelines notified by the Government of India. The Central Adoption
Resource Authority (CARA) is an autonomous body under the Ministry of Women &
Child Development, Government of India. It functions as the nodal body for the
adoption of Indian children and is mandated to monitor and regulate in-country
and inter-country adoptions. CARA is designated as the Central Authority to deal
with inter-country adoptions in accordance with the provisions of the HCCH
Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry
Adoption 1993 (Hague Adoption Convention), ratified by the Government of India
in 2003.
It primarily deals with the adoption of orphaned, abandoned and surrendered
children through its associated/recognised adoption agencies.
By means of a progressive judgment by the Supreme Court, judicial guidelines were
laid down in Lakshmi Kant Pandey v Union of India (UOI) 1985 Supp SCC 701,
under which foreign persons could become guardians of Indian children and adopt
them in accordance with the laws of their home country.
The Madras High Court also observed that when a prima facie case is made out
raising doubts as to genuineness of adoption and documents, the District Social
Welfare Officer must refer the matter to the police for investigation.
In Craig Allen Coates v State and another 2010 (8) SCC 794 it was held that for
inter-country adoptions the procedure followed could include a reference to an
expert committee on the lines constituted in the present case, to ensure that intercountry adoptions are allowed only after full and proper satisfaction is recorded
by all the agencies (including a committee of experts wherever reference to such a
committee is considered necessary).
Until very recently, there was a prohibition under the personal laws to adopt two
children of the same sex. In addition, the Guardian and Wards Act was badly
lacking, particularly in relation to delinquent, juvenile or "juvenile in conflict with
law" children. A "juvenile" means a person who has not completed his/her 18th
year and "juvenile in conflict with law" means a juvenile who is alleged to have
committed an offence (Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act
2000 (JJ Act)).
While the Juvenile Justice Act 1986 dealt with the care and protection of juveniles,
it did not deal with adoption. This gap was filled by the enactment of the JJ Act,
which contains specific provisions for adoption as one of the ways for
rehabilitation and social reintegration of juveniles in conflict with the law.
The Juvenile Justice Act, being secular in nature, supersedes the Hindu Adoptions
and Maintenance Act 1956, and does not impose restrictions on the number of
adopted children from the same gender.
The Bombay High Court in In Re: Adoption of Payal @ Sharinee Vinay Pathak and
his wife Sonika Sahay @ Pathak 2010(1) Bom CR 434 held that when the child to
be adopted is orphaned, abandoned or surrendered, or a child in need of care and
protection as defined in Juvenile Justice Act, the bar imposed by sections 11(i) and
11(ii) of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act does not bar adopting a child of
same gender after having a biological child of that gender.
Adoption is available to individuals (unmarried persons) and both heterosexual and
same sex cohabiting couples.
Cohabitation
33. What legislation (if any) governs division of property and financial claims
for unmarried couples on the breakdown of the relationship?
There is no legislation which governs the division of property for unmarried
couples if the relationship breaks down. However, the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act 2005 (Domestic Violence Act) bestows all benefits on a
woman living in a cohabitation arrangement as available to a married woman, as
she is covered within the term "domestic relationship" under section 2(f).
The Supreme Court of India held in Savitaben Somabhai Bhatiya v State of
Gujarat and others (2005) 3 SCC 636 that a relationship "in the nature of marriage"
is akin to a common law marriage. However, the couple must hold themselves out
to society as being akin to spouses in addition to fulfilling all other requisite
conditions for a valid marriage.
In D Velusamy v D Patchaiammal (2010)10 SCC 469, the Supreme Court observed
that a "relationship in the nature of marriage" is akin to a common law marriage.
Common law marriages require that although not being formally married, the
couple must:
These conditions must be evidenced. Further, the Supreme Court has held that a
"relationship in the nature of marriage" under the 2005 Act must also fulfil the
above requirements, and in addition the parties must have lived together in a
"shared household" as defined in section 2(s) of the Act. Merely spending
weekends together would not make it a domestic relationship.
In Chanmuniya v Chanmuniya Virendra Kumar Singh Kushwaha and another
(2011) 1 SCC 141 the Supreme Court held that where a man has lived with a woman
for a long time, despite not being married, he should be made liable to pay the
woman maintenance if he leaves her. The man should not be allowed to benefit
from legal loopholes by enjoying the advantages of a de facto marriage without
undertaking the duties and obligations.
Hold themselves out to society as being akin to spouses.
Be of legal age to marry.
Be otherwise qualified to enter into a legal marriage, including being unmarried.
Have voluntarily cohabited and held themselves out to the world as being akin
to spouses for a significant period of time.
Through the judgment in Chanmuniya, the Supreme Court has extended relief for
maintenance under section 125 of the CrPC to women in live-in relationships. It has
been held that as monetary relief and compensation can be awarded in cases of
live-in relationships under the Domestic Violence Act, they should also be allowed
in proceedings under section 125 of the CrPC. Sections 18 to 23 of the Domestic
Violence Act provide a large number of reliefs as legal redress. An aggrieved
woman can claim reliefs through the courts in the form of protection orders,
residence orders, monetary relief, custody orders for children, compensation
orders and interim/ex parte orders.
The benefits available to a woman under the Domestic Violence Act include a
woman's right to reside in the shared household with her husband or a partner. If a
husband/partner of the complainant violates protection orders, it will be deemed a
punishable offence. Punishment for violation of the rights enumerated above could
extend to one year's imprisonment and/or a maximum fine of INR20,000.
The Supreme Court in Indra Sarma v VKV Sarma AIR 2014 SC 309 set out some
guidelines for testing under what circumstances, a live-in relationship will fall
within the expression "relationship in the nature of marriage" under section 2(f) of
the Domestic Violence Act.
The question which arose before the Supreme Court was whether a "live-in
relationship" would amount to a "relationship in the nature of marriage" falling
within the definition of "domestic relationship" under section 2(f) of the Domestic
Violence Act and the disruption of such a relationship by failure to maintain a
woman involved in such a relationship amounts to "domestic violence" within the
meaning of section 3 of the Domestic Violence Act. The Supreme Court observed
that a live-in or marriage like relationship is neither a crime nor a sin though
socially unacceptable in this country. The decision to marry or not to marry or to
have a heterosexual relationship is intensely personal.
The Supreme Court distinguished between the relationship in the nature of
marriage and marital relationship. Relationship of marriage continues, despite the
fact that there are differences of opinions, marital unrest and so on, even if they
are not sharing a shared household, being based on law. However, a live-inrelationship is purely an arrangement between the parties, unlike a legal marriage.
Once a party to a live-in-relationship determines that he/she does not wish to live
in such a relationship, that relationship comes to an end. Further, in a relationship
in the nature of marriage, the party asserting the existence of the relationship, at
any stage or at any point of time, must positively prove the existence of the
identifying characteristics of that relationship, since the legislature has used the
expression "in the nature of".
The Supreme Court referred to certain situations, in which the relationship
between an aggrieved person referred to in section 2(a) and the respondent
referred to in section 2(q) of the Domestic Violence Act, would or would not
amount to a relationship in the nature of marriage, would be apposite. The
following are some of the categories of cases which are only illustrative:
Domestic relationship between an unmarried adult woman and an unmarried
adult male. A relationship between an unmarried adult woman and an
unmarried adult male who lived or, at any point of time lived together in a
shared household, will fall under the definition of section 2(f) of the Domestic
Violence Act, and in case there is any domestic violence, the same will fall
under section 3 of the Domestic Violence Act and the aggrieved person can
always seek relief provided under Chapter IV of the Domestic Violence Act.
Domestic relationship between an unmarried woman and a married adult
male. Situations may arise when an unmarried adult woman knowingly enters
into a relationship with a married adult male. The question is whether such a
relationship is a relationship "in the nature of marriage" so as to fall within the
definition of section 2(f) of the Domestic Violence Act.
Domestic relationship between a married adult woman and an unmarried adult
male. Situations may also arise where an adult married woman knowingly
enters into a relationship with an unmarried adult male. The question is
whether such a relationship would fall within the expression relationship "in the
nature of marriage".
Domestic relationship between an unmarried woman who unknowingly enters
into a relationship with a married adult male. This may, in a given situation, fall
within the definition of section 2(f) of the Domestic Violence Act and such a
relationship may be a relationship in the "nature of marriage", so far as the
aggrieved person is concerned.
Domestic relationship between same sex partners (gay and lesbian). The
Domestic Violence Act does not recognise such a relationship and that
relationship cannot be termed as a relationship in the nature of marriage under
the Act. Legislatures in some countries, like the Interpretation Act 1984
(Western Australia), the Interpretation Act 1999 (New Zealand), the Domestic
Violence Act 1998 (South Africa), and the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims
Act 2004 (UK), have recognised the relationship between same sex couples and
have brought these relationships into the definition of domestic relationship.
The Supreme Court held that although section 2(f) of the Domestic Violence
Act uses the expression "two persons", the expression "aggrieved person"
under section 2(a) takes in only "woman", therefore the Act does not recognise
the relationship of same sex (gay or lesbian), and therefore any act, omission,
commission or conduct of any of the parties would not lead to domestic
violence entitling any relief under the Domestic Violence Act.
The Supreme Court held that while determining whether any act, omission,
commission or conduct of the respondent constitutes "domestic violence", there
should be a common sense/balanced approach, after weighing up the various
factors which exist in a particular relationship, and then a conclusion as to whether
a particular relationship is a relationship in the "nature of marriage". The Supreme
Court held that to test whether a particular relationship would fall within the
expression "relationship in the nature of marriage", certain guiding principles have
to be evolved since the expression has not been defined in the Act. Section 2(f) of
the Domestic Violence Act defines "domestic relationship" to mean, among others,
a relationship between two persons who live or have lived together at such point of
time in a shared household, through a relationship in the nature of marriage. The
expression "relationship in the nature of marriage" is also described as a de facto
relationship, a marriage-like relationship, cohabitation, couple relationship,
meretricious relationship (now known as committed intimate relationship) and so
on.
Section 17 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 gives all
married women or female partners in a domestic relationship the right to reside in
a home that is known in legal terms as the "shared household". The same provision
applies even if the woman does not have any right, title or beneficial interest in the
same. The law provides that if an abused woman requires it, she has to be provided
with alternate accommodation. The accommodation and her maintenance must be
paid by her husband or partner.
Family dispute resolution
Mediation, collaborative law and arbitration
34. What non-court-based processes exist to resolve disputes? What is the
current status of agreements reached through mediation, collaborative law
and arbitration?
The Indian judiciary has been proactive over the past few years in having a formal
framework for providing mediation and arbitration services to help litigants resolve
their disputes in an amicable fashion. Numerous mediation and conciliation
centres have opened, which run under the supervision of the High Courts of
various states. The Supreme Court of India also has its own mediation and
conciliation centre.
In family disputes, the medium for amicable settlement adopted is mediation.
There is no legal recognition for "collaborative law" in India, but lawyers do
participate in facilitating settlements. In India, family matters are not the subject
matter of arbitrations.
The mediation and conciliation centre are governed by the rules formulated by the
High Courts of various states from time to time. The agreements reached under the
auspices of mediation and collaborative law have the sanctity of law. Parties who
do not abide by the term and conditions are liable to be sued for breach of
contract and may even be liable for contempt of court.
35. What is the statutory basis (if any), for mediation, collaborative law and
arbitration?
An attempt at reconciliation is mandatory under the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 and
the Special Marriage Act 1954. Other Indian matrimonial statutes do not provide
for it and there is therefore no statutory mandate to attempt settlement in other
cases.
Reconciliation is provided for under sections 23(2) and 23(3) of the Hindu Marriage
Act. Section 23(2) of the Hindu Marriage Act states that before proceeding to grant
any relief under it, the court has a duty in the first instance, in every case, to make
every endeavour to bring about reconciliation between the parties where a divorce
is sought on most of the fault grounds for divorce specified in section 13 of the
Hindu Marriage Act. Section 23(3) of the Hindu Marriage Act makes a provision
empowering the court on the request of parties, or if the court thinks it just and
proper, to adjourn the proceedings for a reasonable period not exceeding 15 days
to bring about reconciliation. It must be borne in mind that a Hindu marriage is a
sacrament and not a contract. Even if divorce is sought by mutual consent, it is the
duty of the court to attempt reconciliation in the first instance. Accordingly, Hindu
law advocates reconciliation before dissolving a Hindu marriage.
The provisions of sections 34(2) and 34(3) of the Special Marriage Act are pari
materia to the provisions contained in sections 23(2) and 23(3) of the Hindu
Marriage Act. Even though the marriage contracted under the SMA does not have
the same sanctity as marriage solemnised under the Hindu Marriage Act, the Indian
Parliament retained the provisions for reconciliation of marriages in the same
terms as they exist in the Hindu Marriage Act.
The provisions under both the statutes are almost identical and accordingly every
endeavour to bring about reconciliation is mandatory.
The mediation and conciliation centres are established under the Rules of the High
Courts within whose jurisdiction they are established.
The option of pre-litigation mediation is available to the parties. However, the
parties are not required to attempt a family dispute resolution in advance of the
institution of proceedings. It is a voluntary and consensual exercise.
Civil partnership/same-sex marriage
36. What is the status of civil partnership/same-sex marriage? What legislation
governs civil partnership/same-sex marriage?
Civil partnership and same-sex marriage are not recognised within the territory of
India and there is no legislation which governs civil partnerships or same sex
marriage.
In Navtej Singh Johar v Union of India (2018) 10 SCC 1, the Supreme Court
decriminalised section 377 of the Indian Penal Code. It was held that section 377
insofar as it criminalises voluntary sexual relations between
lesbian/gay/bisexual/transsexual (LGBT) persons of the same sex in private,
discriminates against them on the basis of their sexual orientation. This is a
violation of their fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 14, 19, and 21 of the
Constitution.
Media access and transparency
37. What is the position regarding media access to and press reporting of
family law cases?
Section 11 of the Family Court Act 1984 provides that in every suit or proceedings
to which this Act applies, the proceedings may be held in camera if the Family
Court so desires and will be so held if either party so desires. "In camera"
proceedings mean that the proceedings are conducted only among the presence
of the judge, the parties and their lawyers. Such proceedings are not conducted in
open court and therefore have no audience and the proceedings are recorded (on
camera). The press has no access to such in camera proceedings. Such proceedings
include all proceedings emanating out of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 and may
include divorce, child custody, maintenance proceedings.
In the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in Santhini v Vijaya Venketesh (2017)
4 SCC 150, it was held that in view of the scheme of Family Courts Act 1984 and in
particular section 11, the hearing of matrimonial disputes may have to be
conducted in camera. It was further held that, when settlement fails and when a
joint application is filed, or where both the parties file their respective consent
memorandum for hearing the case through videoconferencing before the
concerned Family Court, the Court can exercise the discretion to allow the request.
After the settlement fails, if the Family Court considers it appropriate, having
regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, that videoconferencing will subserve the cause of justice, it may so direct.
Family cases in India are generally heard in open court. The media has access to
proceedings and can report family law cases in the press. However, the parties may
move an application before the court and seek the relief in order to have a hearing
in private.
Controversial areas and reform
38. What areas of the law (if any) are currently undergoing major change?
Which areas of law are considered to be particularly controversial?
Very recently, two public interest cases came before the High Court of Delhi,
seeking legalisation of same-sex marriages (under the Special Marriage Act and the
Foreign Marriage Act respectively). The High Court has sought reply from the
government and observed that the statutes are gender-neutral and must be
interpreted in favour of all citizens. These cases are next listed for hearing on 8
January 2021.
COVID-19
39. What has been the impact of COVID-19 and the resultant social distancing
and lockdown measures on the family court system in your jurisdiction?
The functioning of the Indian courts has been severely impacted following the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. During March to May 2020, the functioning of
the courts had been restricted to matters pertaining to urgent relief (although
matters are now improving). Hearings are conducted virtually (video conferencing)
in most matters and deadlines, timescales have been extended.
The Supreme Court of India and the High Courts have adopted measures to reduce
the physical presence of lawyers, litigants, court staff, paralegals and
representatives of the electronic and print media.
In the state of Delhi, the Family Courts are taking up the following as a matter of
priority:
The following are then considered secondary to the matters listed above (all to be
taken up through video conferencing):
Cases in which the parties' arguments have been concluded and were reserved
for order/judgment.
Fresh petitions under section 13-B(2) of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 (that is,
petitions for the second motion of a divorce settlement through mutual
consent) through e-filing, with hearings conducted through video conferencing.
Disposal of all matters relating to final arguments, carried out through video
conferencing.
Urgent applications, whether in pending cases or otherwise, regarding
maintenance, custody and/or visitation rights.
The Delhi High Court recently made an order for visitation right by video
conferencing twice a week to a father living in Dubai. It was directed that the order
will remain effective unless further orders are passed by the Court (Vikas S Gupta v
Neha Gupta CM (M) 445694/ 2020).
In Anand Vaid v Preety Vaid & Ors (WPC 3227/ 2020), the petitioner husband filed a
petition seeking directions for the recording of evidence via video conferencing (or
any such manner feasible) as part of his petition for divorce on the ground of
cruelty and adultery, due to the prevalent lockdown during the COVID-19
pandemic. The Delhi High Court issued such directions. On 1 June 2020, the Delhi
High Court responded to the husband's request by issuing the Video Conferencing
Rules, which provides for the recording of evidence via video conferencing (see
http://delhihighcourt.nic.in/writereaddata/upload/Notification/NotificationFile_UL
DC4UVQWZ9.PDFOpens in a new window.)
Domestic violence in India includes any form of violence suffered by a person from a biological relative
but typically is the violence suffered by a woman by male members of her family or relatives.[1][2]
Although Men also suffer Domestic violence, the law under IPC 498A specifically protects only women.
Specifically only a woman can file a case of domestic violence. According to a National Family and Health
Survey in 2005, total lifetime prevalence of domestic violence was 33.5% and 8.5% for sexual violence
among women aged 15–49.[3] A 2014 study in The Lancet reports that although the reported sexual
violence rate in India is among the lowest in the world, the large population of India means that the
violence affects 27.5 million women over their lifetimes.[4] However, an opinion survey among experts
carried out by the Thomson Reuters Foundation ranked India as the most dangerous country in the world
for women.[5]
The 2012 National Crime Records Bureau report of India states a reported crime rate of 46 per 100,000,
rape rate of 2 per 100,000, dowry homicide rate of 0.7 per 100,000 and the rate of domestic cruelty by
husband or his relatives as 5.9 per 100,000.[6] These reported rates are significantly smaller than the
reported intimate partner domestic violence rates in many countries, such as the United States (590 per
100,000) and reported homicide (6.2 per 100,000 globally), crime and rape incidence rates per 100,000
women for most nations tracked by the United Nations.[7][8][9]
There are several domestic violence laws in India. The earliest law was the Dowry Prohibition Act 1961
which made the act of giving and receiving dowry a crime. In an effort to bolster the 1961 law, two new
sections, Section 498A and Section 304B were introduced into the Indian Penal Code in 1983 and 1986.
The most recent legislation is the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act (PWDVA) 2005. The
PWDVA, a civil law, includes physical, emotional, sexual, verbal, and economic abuse as domestic violence.
Background
Domestic violence, or intimate partner violence (IPV) as it is sometimes called, is a worldwide problem.[10]
Domestic abuse includes physical, emotional and sexual violence of any form. In India, the PWDVA also
includes economic abuse under the definition of domestic violence. A 1999 study examined the
Petitions under section 13-B(1) Hindu Marriage Act (that is, petitions for the
first motion of divorce through mutual consent).
Ex-parte matters.
prevalence and characteristics of domestic abuse in five districts of northern India during 1995–1996. The
study reported that in those five districts, lifetime prevalence of domestic abuse ranged from 18% to 45%.
[1]
Definition and law
Main article: Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005
Domestic violence is currently defined in India by the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act of
2005. According to Section 3 of the Act, "any act, omission or commission or conduct of the respondent
shall constitute domestic violence in case it:[11]
2005 it was made illegal Jammu and Kashmir, which has its own laws, has enacted in 2010 the Jammu and
Kashmir Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2010.[12]
2006 NFHS survey report on domestic sexual violence
The National Family Health Survey of India in 2006 estimated the lifetime prevalence of sexual violence
among women aged 15–49, including instances of marital rape in India. The study included in its definition
of "sexual violence" all instances of a woman experiencing her husband "physically forcing her to have
sexual intercourse with him even when she did not want to; and, forcing her to perform any sexual acts she
did not want to".[13] The study sampled 83,703 women nationwide, and determined that 8.5% of women in
the 15–49 age group had experienced sexual violence in their lifetime.[14] This figure includes all forms of
forced sexual activity by husband on wife, during their married life, but not recognised as marital rape by
Indian law.
The 2006 NFHS study reported sexual violence to be lowest against women in the 15–19 age group, and
urban women reporting 6% lifetime prevalence rate of sexual violence, while 10% of rural women reported
experiencing sexual violence in their lifetime.[15] Women with ten years of education experienced sharply
less sexual violence, compared to women with less education.[15] The total of some 83703 women took
part and of 67426 Hindu women who took part in it 22453, that is equal to 33.3% respondents said yes to
being physically abused at their home, similar is the case of Buddhist women where 40% women said yes
to being physically abused.
1.  harms or injures or endangers the health, safety, life, limb or well-being, whether mental
or physical, of the aggrieved person or tends to do so and includes causing physical
abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse; or
2.  harasses, harms, injures or endangers the aggrieved person with a view to coerce her or
any other person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any dowry or other
property or valuable security; or
3.  has the effect of threatening the aggrieved person or any person related to her by any
conduct mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b); or
4.  otherwise injures or causes harm, whether physical or mental, to the aggrieved person.”
The credibility of the Report is in question as it is not clear which section of the society was interviewed. As
the same report suggests that domestic abuse against women in poorer families was far higher than the
middle or upper class.[16]
A 2014 study in The Lancet states, "Whereas an 8.5% prevalence of sexual violence in the country [India] is
among the lowest in the world, it is estimated to affect 27.5 million women in India [given India's large
population]".[4] Further, the 2006 survey found that 85% of women who suffered sexual violence, in or
outside of marriage, never sought help, and only 1% report it to the police.[4][17]
Data reliability
Renuka Chowdhury, former Union minister for Women and Child Development, stated in 2006, that around
70% of women in India are victims of domestic violence.[18] However her statistics were disputed by Save
Indian Family Foundation, stating that Renuka Chowdhury talked about the reported dowry death cases
and deliberately avoided mentioning the actual convictions in "dowry death trials" after false cases are
dismissed in the courts.[19] According to a BBC report, in 2013, around 309,546 crimes were reported
against women of which 118,866 were for domestic violence alone.[20]
Forms
Religion Participants Percentage who
experienced violence
Hinduism 67,426 33.7
Buddhism 681 40.9
Sikhism 1,492 26.1
Jainism 264 12.6
Islam 11,396 34.6
Christianity 2,039 27.8
Others 333 36.3
The map shows the comparative rate of violence against women in Indian states and union territories
in 2012. Crime rate data per 100,000 women in this map is the broadest definition of crime against
women under Indian law. It includes rape, sexual assault, insult to modesty, kidnapping, abduction,
cruelty by intimate partner or relatives, trafficking, persecution for dowry, dowry deaths, indecency,
and all other crimes listed in Indian Penal Code.[8][21]Physical violence[edit]
Physical injury is the most visible form of domestic violence. The scope of physical domestic/intimate
partner violence includes slapping, pushing, kicking, biting, hitting, throwing objects, strangling, beating,
threatening with any form of weapon, or using a weapon.[22] Worldwide, the percentage of women who
suffer serious injuries as a result of physical domestic violence tends to range from 19% – 55%.[2] Physical
injuries as a result of domestic violence against women are more obvious than psychological ones, and can
be more easily discerned by health professionals as well as courts of law in the context of legal
prosecution.
Emotional abuse
Emotional abuse has been gaining more and more recognition in recent years as an incredibly common
form of domestic violence (and therefore a human rights abuse) within the private home throughout
developing nations such as India. Psychological abuse can erode a woman's sense of self-worth and can be
incredibly harmful to overall mental and physical wellbeing. Emotional/psychological abuse can include
harassment; threats; verbal abuse such as name-calling, degradation and blaming; stalking; and isolation.
[22]
Women who experience domestic violence overwhelmingly tend to have greater overall emotional distress,
as well as disturbingly high occurrences of suicidal thoughts and attempts. According to a study by the
National Centre for Biotechnology Information, suicide attempts in India are correlated with physical and
psychological intimate partner violence. Of the Indian women who participated in the study, 7.5% reported
attempting suicide. This correlation is supported by the high rates of domestic violence in India, although
the rates differ greatly by region, individual socioeconomic status and other factors.[23]
Sexual assault
Further information: Rape in India
Domestic sexual assault is a form of domestic violence involving sexual/reproductive coercion and marital
rape. Under Indian law, marital rape is not a crime,[24][25] except during the period of marital separation of
the partners.[26]
The Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) considers the forced sex in marriages as a crime only when
the wife is below 15. Thus, marital rape is not a criminal offense under IPC.[27] The marital rape victims
have to take recourse to the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 2005 (PWDVA).[28] The
PWDVA, which came into force in 2006, outlaws marital rape.[29] However, it offers only a civil remedy for
the offence.[30]
Honor killing
An honour killing is the practice wherein an individual is killed by one or more family member(s), because
he or she is believed to have brought shame on the family.[31] The shame may range from refusing to enter
an arranged marriage, having sex outside marriage, being in a relationship that is disapproved by the family,
starting a divorce proceeding, or engaging in homosexual relations.[32][33]
In 2010, the Supreme Court of India issued notice seeking data and explanation for rise in honor killings to
the states of Punjab, Haryana, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya
Pradesh.[34]
Dowry-related abuse and deaths
See also: Bride burning
In almost all Hindu families, the ritual of taking dowry has caused a serious problem. A newly married
brides suffer domestic violence in the form of harassment, physical abuse or death when she is thought to
have not brought enough dowry with marriage. Some cases end up in suicides by hanging, self-poisoning or
by fire.[35][36] In dowry deaths, the groom's family is the perpetrator of murder or suicide.[37]
According to Indian National Crime Record Bureau, in 2012, 8,233 dowry death cases were reported across
India,[38] or dowry issues cause 1.4 deaths per year per 100,000 women in India.[39][40] For contextual
reference, the United Nations reports a worldwide average female homicide rate of 3.6 per 100,000
women, and an average of 1.6 homicides per 100,000 women for Northern Europe in 2012.[41]
Dowry deaths in India are not limited to any specific religion, and it is found among Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs
and others. Some 80% of the total Dowry related crime found in the Hindu community followed by other
Indian Religions as giving Dowry is considered as an important ritual in the traditional Hindu marriage.
Furthermore, in many parts of India the Ritual of Tilak(Engagement)done mostly in Hindu families is used
by Groom's Family to Demand a huge sum of money.[42][43]
The Dowry Prohibition Act 1961, prohibits the request, payment or acceptance of a dowry, "as
consideration for the marriage", where "dowry" is defined as a gift demanded or given as a precondition for
a marriage. Gifts given without a precondition are not considered dowry and are legal. Asking or giving of
dowry can be punished by imprisonment of up to six months or a fine. It replaced several pieces of antidowry legislation that had been enacted by various Indian states.[44] Murder and suicide under
compulsion are addressed by India's criminal penal code. The law was made more stringent with Section
498a of Indian Penal Code (enacted in 1983). Under the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act
2005 (PWDVA), a woman can seek help against dowry harassment by approaching a domestic violence
protection officer.
Regional, gender and religious differences
Kimuna et al. have published domestic violence trends in India, based on the 2005–2006 India National
Family Health Survey-III (NFHS-III) data on the 69,484 ever-married women ages 15 to 49 from all regions of
India.[45] They report 31% of respondents had experienced minor to major form of physical violence in the
12 months prior to the survey, while the domestic sexual violence prevalence rate ever experienced by the
woman was about 8%. Women who lived in cities, had higher household wealth, were Christian and
educated had significantly lower risk of physical and sexual domestic violence.[45] In contrast, wives of
men who drank alcohol had significantly higher risks of experiencing both physical and sexual violence.[45]
According to a study made by Michael Koenig about the determinants of domestic violence in India
published by the American Journal of Public Health in 2006, higher socioeconomic status reduced
domestic abuse.[46]
Gender
Babu et al. surveyed both genders on domestic violence in eastern region of India.[47] The results show
that 16% of women had reported experiencing physical forms of domestic violence, 25% sexual form, 53%
psychological, and 56% reported any form of domestic violence.[47] Men reported being perpetrators of
domestic violence with 22% reporting some form of physical domestic abuse, 17% sexual, 59%
psychological, and 59.5% any form of domestic abuse. Men reported experiencing higher prevalence of all
forms of violence, but reported experiencing lowest rates of sexual violence. The perpetrator of domestic
violence, physical or sexual or psychological, was typically the husband in majority of cases and in some
cases husbands' parents. Further, low income and low education increased the risks of domestic violence.
[47]
Religion
The National Family Health Survey of India in 2006 estimated the lifetime prevalence of sexual violence
among women aged 15–49, including instances of marital rape in India. The study included in its definition
of "sexual violence" all instances of a woman experiencing her husband "physically forcing her to have
sexual intercourse with him even when she did not want to; and, forcing her to perform any sexual acts she
did not want to".[12] The study sampled 83,703 women nationwide, and determined that 8.5% of women in
the 15–49 age group had experienced sexual violence in their lifetime.[13] This figure includes all forms of
forced sexual activity by husband on wife, during their married life, but not recognised as marital rape by
Indian law.[16]
In 2005–2006 nationwide family and health survey report, the lowest domestic violence prevalence rate
was reported by women of Jainism religion (12.6% of women), the highest by women of Buddhist religion
(40.9%).[48] The same report also states that the frequency and intensity of domestic violence
experienced was lowest among Jain women who had ever been victims of such violence.[48]
Dynamics
A map of the Indian dowry death rate per 100,000 people in 2012.[6]According to Unicef's Global
Report Card on Adolescents 2012, 57% of boys and 53% of girls in India think a husband is justified in
hitting or beating his wife.[49]
Patriarchal social structure
There are three main aspects of the patriarchal household structure in India that affect women's agency:
marriage, active discrimination by means of abuse (marital or extramarital), and diminished women's
agency through limited economic opportunity through stifled opportunity for independence.[50] In all
these dimensions, there is a clear relationship between strong patriarchal familial structures and limited
capabilities and agency for women, which are strongly correlated with causal factors for domestic violence
such as gender disparities in nutritional deprivation and a lack of women's role in reproductive decisions.
[50]
Dowry system
See also: Dowry law in India and Dowry death
Domestic violence often happens in India as a result of dowry demands.[51] Dowry payments are another
manifestation of the patriarchal structure in India. There are strong links between domestic violence and
dowry, a cultural practice deeply rooted in many Indian communities, which is the money, goods, or
property the woman/woman's family brings to a marriage to now become under the ownership of the
husband. This practice continues even today in India although banned by law since 1961, and in recent
years dowry amounts have risen dramatically.[citation needed]
In a 2005 study published in World Development, results from a survey pointed to a negative correlation
between dowry amount and inter-spousal violence, indicating the potential dangers of a wife falling short
on dowry payments or expectations.[52] These dangers include not only common physical and emotional
abuse such as hitting and continual degradation, but in some cases dowry death and bride burning as a
result of the husband's dissatisfaction with the dowry payment. In fact, 8391 dowry deaths reported in
2010, a steep rise from 6995 such reported cases in 1997.[53]
Under-reporting of domestic violence
According to Shalu Nigam, the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1983 Section 498A "criminalized cruelty
within a marriage."[54] However, many women who filed cases under section 498A of Indian Penal Code
end up getting revictimized in the process.[55] Domestic violence was often not handled as a legitimate
crime or complaint, but more of a private or family matter while negating the rights of women as citizens.
[56] Myth and misogyny operate while implementing the law.[57] But now this trend has changed. Section
498a introduced to protect women from Domestic Violence.[58]
Caste, class, religious bias and race also determine whether action is taken or not.[58] For example, poor or
lower-caste females do not have the same access to legal enforcement or education and often have
trouble getting help from law enforcement.[59]
Other
Other factors outside culture that demonstrate differences in domestic violence prevalence and gender
disparities in India include socioeconomic class, educational level, and family structure beyond the
patriarchal framework. A 1999 study published by the American Journal of Epidemiology identified socalled “stress factors” that are critical to understanding varying rates of domestic violence in other scopes
outside of region-specific factors. These stress-related factors within the household include low
educational attainment, poverty, young initial age of marriage, having multiple children, and other limiting
engendered development factors.[10]
Effects
Victims suffer many types of physical and emotional abuse as a result of illegal actions taken within the
private home, and those who have experienced some form of domestic violence tend to have greater longterm mental disorders and drug dependencies than those who do not.[60] In India, reducing domestic
violence is imperative not only from an ethical and human rights perspective but also because of obvious
instrumental and immediate health benefits that would be gained from such reduction.[61]
Health
Further information: Women's health in India
Serious health problems often result from physical, emotional, and sexual forms of domestic violence.[2]
Physical health outcomes include: Injury (from lacerations to fractures and internal organs injury),
Unwanted Pregnancy, Gynaecological problems, STDs including HIV, Miscarriage, Pelvic inflammatory
disease, Chronic pelvic pain, Headaches, Permanent disabilities, Asthma, Irritable bowel syndrome, Selfinjurious behaviours (smoking, unprotected sex)[62] Mental health effects can include depression, fear,
anxiety, low self-esteem, sexual dysfunction, eating disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder, or post
traumatic stress disorder.[62] Fatal effects can include suicide, homicide, maternal mortality, or HIV/AIDS.
[62]
Negative public health consequences are also strongly associated with domestic violence.[2] Social and
economic costs have been identified as direct results of these public-health consequences, and it is
argued that these justify state action to act in the interest of the public to reconcile these costs
(specifically including costs such as worker earnings and productivity, public healthcare, and costs
associated with the criminal justice system).[63]
Women's agency
The act of domestic violence towards women is a human rights violation as well as an illegal act under
Indian law. It is therefore widely considered a threat to women's agency through any lens, and there is a
growing recognition in many Indian regions that the nation can reach a higher potential through obtaining
greater social and economic capital than by reducing women's participation in society. Domestic violence
is one of the most significant determinants of this denial. Greater gender equality through greater women's
agency cannot be achieved if basic health needs are not being met and if cultural biases that allow for
domestic violence in India persist.[62]
Legal efforts
New sexual violence legislation
Main article: Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
On 19 March 2013, the Indian Parliament passed a new law with the goal of more effectively protecting
women from sexual violence in India.[64] It came in the form of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013,
which further amends the Indian Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1973, the Indian Evidence
Act of 1872, and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.[65] The law makes stalking,
voyeurism, acid attacks and forcibly disrobing a woman explicit crimes for the first time, provides capital
punishment for rapes leading to death, and raises to 20 years from 10 the minimum sentence for gang rape
and rapes committed by a police officer. The new law doesn't address marital rape, rape committed by the
armed forces or rape against men.[66]
Conservative lawmakers and anti-women's rights supporters still claim that the higher age of consent
could results in abuses and wrongful arrests in statutory rape in spite of the high incidence of unreported
or reported cases of sexual abuse that warrants such laws. According to a 2012 United Nations report, 47%
of Indian women marry younger than 18 (the legal marriage age is 21 for men and 18 for women).[67]
Gender discrimination under law
The domestic abuse laws are claimed to be discriminatory against men by male right activists.[68] In
particular, Section 498A, the act that criminalizes cruelty against women by husband and his relatives, has
been used by anti-feminists in their arguments to justify removing any legal penalty against criminals.
Men's rights activists such as the "Save the family foundation" in India argue that the law is often misused
by women. However, a 2012 report on Section 498A from the Government of India found that the empirical
study did not establish any disproportionate misuse of Section 498A as compared to other criminal laws.
[69] Even though misuse of Section 498A was not established, more recently the Supreme Court came out
with directives that every complaint received by the police under Section 498A must be referred to a
Family Welfare Committee before the police can arrest the perpetrator.[70] [71]
More glaringly, the law only offers reliefs to women. Men in India cannot avail of a similar legal remedy to
protect themselves from domestic violence from either men or women. For men, even a simple relief of
having a male or female aggressor stay away from them (a restraining or protection order) is not afforded
by the current law.
But in 2016 this discrimination was removed by supreme court itself. The bench of Justices Kurian Joseph
and Rohinton F Nariman ruled on 6 October 2016 (Thursday) that this provision frustrated the objective of
the legislation since "perpetrators and abettors of domestic violence" can be women too. The words "adult
male" has been struck down from the domestic violence act. However this new definition still did not
include men as victims and was later changed back to the original.[72]
Prenuptial, postnuptial and separation
agreements
English courts are increasingly taking marital agreements into account when deciding
how to divide assets on divorce although these are not currently legally binding. A well
written and carefully planned prenuptial agreement can potentially protect you and
your spouse from unnecessary conflict and hostility should the relationship come to an
end.
The different between the three types of agreement are that prenuptial agreements are
entered into before the marriage, postnuptial agreements are entered into during or
after the marriage and separation agreements are entered into at the end of the
marriage. Often the agreements will be similar in terms of the issues they cover. These
may include financial provision should the relationship come to an end, how you and
your partner are to be rehoused and how many children will be looked after financially.
Although such agreements are not automatically binding, they may carry decisive
weight and the court is likely to hold the parties to an agreement which has been freely
and voluntarily entered into where disclosure and independent advice have been given
where there is no duress and the agreement is broadly fair.
During a marriage or if one spouse is unhappy, sometimes it may be sensible to enter
into a postnuptial agreement or a separation agreement so that you and your partner
can work on the relationship without worrying about the financial consequences of
whether the relationship endures or not.
Our solicitors in Clapham, Hammersmith and Liverpool Street can help you and your
partner to navigate what may otherwise be a difficult negotiation exercise. The process
can also be highly emotive and sensitive.
Why not give us a call to discuss further how we can help you and your spouse bring
clarity to your financial arrangements.
India has no law on prenuptial or post nuptial agreements. Such agreements are
not common in India and are contrary to Indian customs and views about marriage.
Nevertheless, the global publicity about celebrity prenuptial agreements is
encouraging more affluent people to consider the idea in India.
There appears to be no significant case law in India on the topic of prenups or
postnups. Critically, the Supreme Court of India -- which is vested with extremely
broad power to do justice between the parties and which has been quite active in
matters concerning the grounds for divorce -- has taken no stand on the matter of
prenuptial agreements.
It is therefore essential to understand that while prenuptial agreements might be a
valuable way for parties in India to express their intention concerning the nature of
their financial relationship, it is not possible to assure -- or even to expect -- that
such agreed terms will be upheld in an Indian court.
International clients should also anticipate that prenuptial and post nuptial
agreements entered into while they reside outside India will likely not be enforced
if either of them should initiate a divorce case in an Indian court.
Guardianship:Guardianship is a need based provision as per Section 14(3) of National Trust Act, 1999.
Please click for the Statewise/Districtwise Status of Legal guardianship Applications submitted online to
the Local Level Committees.
What is Guardianship?
A guardian is a person who is appointed to look after another person or his property. He or she assumes the care and
protection of the person for whom he/she is appointed the guardian. The guardian takes all legal decisions on behalf of the
person and the property of the ward. The occasion for taking care of another person may be his minority that is, a person
who has not completed 18 years of age. It can also refer to guardianship of a person who because of physical and mental
deficiencies is unable to take care of himself or his property. From early times, the condition of minority has been the ground
for appointment of guardians in all societies. This is due to the fact that a minor person is considered unfit to take decisions
for himself, which can be binding on him as regards others. Therefore, a minor person is treated in law as incompetent to
enter into contract with a person who is an adult. In all matters therefore, a minor has also been considered unfit to
represent himself except through his guardian. A guardian takes decision on behalf of the minor for protecting the interests
of the minor and his property.
Source -Guardianship and Wards Act, 1890. Indian Contract Act-1872. Mental Health Act 1987
Special situation of persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple disabilities.
Persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation and multiple disabilities are in a special situation as even after they
have acquired 18 years of age, they may not always be capable of managing their own lives or taking legal decisions for their
own betterment. Therefore, they may require someone to represent their interests in the legal areas throughout their lives.
However, in cases of cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities, there may be a need for only limited guardianship because of
the availability of enabling mechanisms and/ or scientific facilitations which enable such persons to function with varying
degrees of independence.
Source - As per opinion of Disability Experts that NT Disabilities are conditions which cannot be cured and are not a disease.
As per Legal Advice of ALA.
Guardianship under the National Trust Act
Under section 14 of the National Trust Act, the Local Level Committee headed by the District Collector is empowered to
receive application in Form A under Rule 16(1) & appoint guardians in Form B under Rule 16(2) for persons with Autism,
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation & Multiple Disabilities. It also provides mechanism for monitoring and protecting their
interests including their properties.
India: Wills In India- Inheritance Laws In India
For Wills
Introduction
A will is a legal document that expresses a person's desires about the management or distribution of their
possessions after death. Despite being legally binding documents, wills in India can be written in any
format. A will does not have to be written on stamp paper when asking about creating a will in India; it can
be typed or written by hand. Yet, a handwritten will is preferred because it is harder to challenge.
According to the Indian Succession Act of 1925, anyone who is of sound mind and is not a minor may make
a will.
As creating a will in India is considered to be a real inconvenience, many people elect to die intestate.
Nonetheless, having a will is crucial. The fact that it gives precise instructions regarding the decedent's
possessions and estate is the most important component of creating a will in India. A will eliminates any
potential for future confusion by specifying who will receive each piece of property. As a result, it helps to
lessen family disputes. It gives one the option to designate a beneficiary to receive their assets after death.
The Hindu Succession Act states that in the case of an intestate death, the estate descends intestate to
heirs who the decedent may not have intended to receive it. A person includes a safety net for his little
children in his will. He can select a guardian for them and make any financial preparations required. It can
be crucial to protecting one's business. If one distributes their firm and powers of attorney to their
selected heirs, there can be less conflict in commercial relationships. It also makes it feasible to make sure
that, in the event of a second marriage, the children from the first marriage are not in any way disinherited.
In addition to declaring the inheritance in favour of friends and family members, it may also name a charity
or any other organisation.
Due to its utmost importance, creating a will in India should be the first financial choice taken. It must be
made clear in order for the testator's intention to be known without a shadow of a doubt. The complexity
of writing a will shouldn't be a reason to put it off. People are very reluctant to talk about wills, according to
Shankar Pai, the founder of the Make a Will Foundation. They think the person asking about their will is
either hinting at their death or is only interested in their stuff.
Wills and essential requirements of Valid Will
The Indian Succession Act, 1925 regulates the sorts of wills in India, as well as the laws and regulations that
apply to cases of intestacy. It also addresses cases of intestacy. The succession of a person's moveable
property shall be governed by the laws of the person's country of domicile.
Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act of 1925 outlines the requirements for a valid will in India.
The will must begin by stating that the testator is of sound mind and must name the
executor to carry out their instructions. Any previous wills and codicils must be cancelled
In addition to the previous requirements, there are other essentials for a valid will in India.
The types of Wills in India
As per Section 59 of the Indian Succession Act, any mentally sound adult who is not a minor is permitted
to make a will, assuming they have the capacity to understand its contents and the effects of the
disposition. The responsibility to demonstrate that the will-maker acted voluntarily and without duress or
coercion falls on the individual. A will written during a period of sound mental health is considered valid,
even if the individual is prone to insanity on occasion.
Probate and obtaining probate
After death, the estate of a person must be distributed to the heirs. This is often a protracted process
known as probate. In order to ensure that the heirs receive their inheritance, an executor is responsible for
carrying out the necessary procedures to move the estate through probate. The duties of the executor are
numerous, yet they are also limited.
When a person passes away, the probate procedure begins when the local court receives the will, death
certificate, and other required documents. The selection or appointment of a person to act as the estate's
executor is the first step in the probate process, which is overseen by the court. Once appointed, they are
in charge of handling the estate administration and asset distribution in accordance with the guidelines
laid down in each state's probate code.
if this is not the first will.
The testator must create a list of all their assets, including property, savings accounts,
term deposits, and mutual funds.
The will must specify in writing who will receive which assets, including a custodian for
minors.
The will must be signed in the presence of two witnesses who must attest to the
execution by signing it. The date, full names, and addresses of the witnesses must be
included in the will.
Every page of the will must be signed by the testator and the witnesses.
Any amendments to the will must be countersigned by the testator and the witnesses.
The original will must be stored in a safe place, and copies must be stored separately if
any are produced.
The testator must sign or append their signature to the will.
The will must be witnessed by at least two people.
The witnesses must have seen the testator's signature or mark on the will.
Each witness must sign the will in the presence of the testator.
The witnesses cannot be beneficiaries of the will.
Privileged Wills and Unprivileged Will
Contingent or Conditional Will
Joint Will
Concurrent Will
Mutual Will
Duplicate Will
Holograph Will
Sham Will
Most typically, an adult child or grandchild from the immediate family serves as the executor. It might be
the surviving parent, brother, or spouse. If no family member is accessible or able to complete the task, a
friend may be selected. In some states, the executor must be an attorney.
An executor's duties and powers:
Succession laws in India
The law has also set rules for adherents of other religions, which must be followed, in accordance with the
Indian Succession Act of 1925, the Hindu Succession Act of 1956, and Sharia law.
One of the executor's first duties is to protect the estate. This can require locating all of
the decedent's assets, getting access to real properties, and making sure that a manager
is in charge of any enterprises the decedent owned. At this time, they must also let the
heirs know that the estate is being probated.
If the decedent leaves behind property suitable for the purpose, it is the executor's duty
to raise the necessary funds in a manner consistent with his state of affairs to carry out
the necessary funeral rites.
They have debts to settle as well as assets to manage.
Before dispersing assets, the executor can and must settle creditors' debts when they
become due.
Also, the executor is in charge of submitting an estate tax return, paying any outstanding
state and federal taxes, and paying estate taxes. An accounting record must be kept for
the court and all payments must be supported by documentation.
During this time, the executor is required to list all of the estate's assets.
When all debts have been paid, the executor is responsible for distributing the remaining
assets to the beneficiaries and heirs in line with the stipulations of the will.
Although a will's provision for payment may be changed by the probate court, this
happens regularly.
1.  Hindu man (covered under Hindu Succession Act)
"First, the property will devolve upon relatives indicated in Class I";
"If there is no Class I successor, then upon Class II relatives";
"In case there's no Class II heir, then upon agnates"
"On the cognates, if there isn't an agnate."
2.  Female Hindu
Initially, the husband, sons, and daughters (including the children of any deceased son or
daughter) shall all inherit the land equally;
Pertaining to the heirs of the spouse;
If the husband has no heirs, on the parents;
On to the heirs of the father;
On to the mother's heirs, lastly.
3.  Christians (Indian Succession Act)
The wife will receive a third of the remaining property, with an equal share going to the
children (including the children of any deceased son or daughter).
If there is no wife, the property will be split equally between the husband's family and the
wife, as well as between the husband's family and any children, if any.
It will go to the deceased's parents last
4.  Parsis (Indian Succession Act)
FAQs
The Indian Succession Act of 1925 gave anyone the right for contesting a will in India or a grant of probate
(Act). "The Act grants the right to file a caveat against the issuance of probate to anyone who has an
interest in the testator's estate and wants to contest the Will's validity."
The grounds for contesting a will in India are as under:
Some examples of succession laws in India include the Hindu Succession Act of 1956, the Indian
Succession Act of 1925, and Sharia law. The legislation also outlines the rules that followers of other
religions must abide.
A will may be amended or revoked by the testator as many times as desired during his or her lifetime. If the
original will was registered, the amendment or alteration must also be documented. A codicil is an official
document produced in connection with a will that explains, modifies, or adds to the dispositions in the will.
Introduction to Juveline deliquency
Have ever heard or seen a child stealing something from a shop or witnessed a minor assaulting or
threatening somebody?
I am sure this might be shocking for you. You might also be questioning why a child would commit
such unlawful or illegal acts. But let me tell you, it’s true.
A country’s future relies largely on its future generation. Whether a country would be a developed
country in future or its growth would be static depends on its human resource. Thus, it is necessary
to invest in the development of the citizens, especially the young generation which consists of
children, adolescents and teenagers. If they are nourished well with love and care and moral values
are imbibed in them, they will surely become law-abiding citizens. However, if they are neglected or
If there is no wife, the children receive an equal share of the property. The deceased
person's parents receive the assets if neither the wife nor the children survive.
5.  Muslims (covered under Shariat Act)
A list of the deceased person's property that must be divided amongst the wife and
children is compiled by the Gazi (judge acting in line with Islamic religious law), who also
takes into consideration the cost of the funeral.
6.  HUF (by survival)
The assets of a HUF are lost by survivorship. The property is passed down through four
generations to the surviving members if the karta dies. According to Hindu law, the
property will not be passed to the heirs, regardless of their religious affiliation.
1.  Can a will be challenged in court in India?
"Coercion, fraud, or improper influence"
"The existence of suspicion"
"Lack of testamentary ability or intention"
"Incorrect execution"
"Lacking knowledge"
1.  What are the inheritance laws in India?
1.  Can a person change their will in India?
involved in bad company or experience an abusive childhood, they might turn into a delinquent, i.e.,
one who shows disapproved behaviour or does not abide by the norms, rules and laws in a society,
at a young age.
Children of tender age are delicate and mould themselves according to the circumstances they
face. They could either come out and shine bright or become criminals. Thus, it becomes necessary
to give importance to their development and growth. Any reason that could contribute to juvenile
delinquency must be taken seriously, and efforts must be made to minimise such reasons. The
present article deals with the meaning of juvenile delinquency, factors that are responsible for such
acts and behaviours, laws prevailing regarding this, and the treatment of juveniles. It also provides
initiatives or measures for the prevention of juvenile delinquency.
Meaning and Aim of the Juvenile Justice
System
Adolescent Justice System
An adolescent is a youngster who isn’t yet mature enough to be viewed as a grown-up. Juvenile
Justice manages the treatment of kids in the struggle with the law and furthermore takes a gander
at the main drivers of culpable conduct and measures to avert such conduct.
Aims of Juvenile Justice
Juvenile Delinquency
Juvenile Delinquency is the involvement of a kid who is between the age of 10 and 17 in illegal
activity or behaviour. Adolescent misconduct is likewise used to allude to youngsters who display
constant conduct of underhandedness or noncompliance, in order to be considered out of parental
control, getting to be plainly subject to legitimate activity by the court framework. Juvenile
delinquency is also known as “juvenile offending,” and each state has a separate legal system in
place to deal with juveniles who break the law.
The term ‘delinquency’ is derived from the Latin word ‘delinquer’, which means ‘omit’. Juvenile
delinquency refers to the disapproved behaviour of children and adolescents, where they tend to
show criminal behaviour. In simple terms, it means deviance from the approved norms and laws in
society, where children usually indulge in anti-social activities.
The term has an extensive meaning and also includes the hostile behaviour of a child. However,
according to a settled principle of criminal law which is also applicable to international criminal law,
“nullum crimen sine lege,” which means that an act of a person cannot become a crime and he or
she cannot face punishment for that unless it is recognised or defined under the law. Thus, an
It is based on the rights of the child.
It applies the principle of restorative justice i.e. to restore the balance of a situation
disturbed by crime rather than simply meting out punishment.
This system puts the best interest of the child first.
The primary objective of this system is to focus on the prevention of crimes and injustice
done to juveniles.
orphan or abandoned child or a child with uncontrollable and aggressive behaviour cannot be said
to commit a crime unless he does an unlawful or illegal act which is considered to be an offence
under the existing law of the country in which it is enacted. These offences could include murder,
rape, theft, kidnapping, assault, and so on.
This problem of juvenile delinquency is persistent in every country and thus, the issue of having a
uniform definition of the term was identified by the United Nations. This resulted in the Second
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and Treatment of Offenders which was held in
1960. The term was defined as, “ acts of minors due to which they violate criminal law and indulge
in behaviour which is objected to and disapproved by society and law of the country in which they
reside.”
Causes of juvenile delinquency
The problem of juvenile delinquency has become a hot issue for the world and persists in every
country across the globe. In order to deal with this issue and uproot it from our society, it is
imperative to understand the fundamental causes and reasons of juvenile delinquency.
Advancement of technology and economic growth
With the advancement of technology and the growth and development of society, there has been a
change in the thinking process. There is a high influence of westernisation and modernisation on the
lifestyle of people. Apart from this, with the establishment of industries, people started migrating
from rural areas to urban areas and there arose the issue of slums, overcrowding etc. This further
led to economic and financial problems for families.
To curb such problems, children engaged themselves either in child labour or deviant activities.
This gave rise to juvenile delinquency. It has been observed that the temptation to live a luxurious
life led youngsters towards wrongful means to fulfil their desires.
Family issues
Another major reason behind the increase in juvenile delinquency is family issues. Family is the first
place to which a child is attached. Children usually learn from what they observe around them. If
there is disintegration in the family, such as continuous fights between parents, lack of love and
affection, broken families, etc., it will affect a child’s growth and development mentally, physically,
and emotionally and would also lead to juvenile delinquency.
Once a child feels neglected by his or her own parents and relatives, it can cause him or her to
commit crimes due to aggression and other negative feelings. Children at a tender age need
affection, love, care, protection, and guidance. Families must emphasise preventing children from
indulging in criminal behaviour and focus on their growth and development so that they become
successful and law-abiding citizens. Adequate opportunities must be given to them by their parents
to develop their personalities with proper education that is channelled correctly.
Changing patterns in lifestyle
A change in lifestyle is yet another reason for criminal behaviour in children. The immaterial and
changing patterns in the lifestyle of people make it arduous for children and teenagers to adjust
and revamp their family relations. They are mostly confronted with the issue of the generation gap
due to which they detach themselves and develop apathy. They are also incapable of distinguishing
between right and wrong i.e., become amoral. Apparently, they are misguided and end up choosing
the immoral or evil path. Another reason for showing delinquent tendencies is the company of
children. People with whom they spend most of their time can either shape their personalities into
law-abiding citizens or turn them into criminals.
Another drawback of change in lifestyle is that most of the time, parents and children do not
interact with each other. Parents are either too busy with their office work and schedules or
struggling with their own complications in life as a result of which children are often neglected. This
might induce frustration, anxiety and aggression in children. Thus, it is necessary that parents and
children interact with each other and spend some quality time to comprehend the issues faced by
children in their day-to-day lives. Parents must also listen to their children and be concerned to
help them whenever they require it.
Biological factors
Biological factors like physiological and mental issues, low intelligence, a lack of understanding, etc.
also lead to delinquent behaviour among children. It has been observed that girls usually attain
puberty at a very young age and can easily become prey to sexual offences. Curiosity is another
preeminent reason for delinquent behaviour among juveniles with respect to sexual offences like
rape. Here comes the role of parents, teachers, and elders. They must educate their children
regarding the biological differences between a male and female and answer all their questions
regarding other biological processes and consequences of any illegal or unlawful act.
Poverty
When a child is not able to get the basic necessities of life, there is high chance that the child may
indulge in delinquent acts to get those necessities. This means that poverty also contributes to
juvenile delinquency. Failure to provide children with necessities like food, shelter, clothes,
education, etc. can force them to earn money by hook or crook in order to get what they desire.
People living in slums find it difficult to survive as they are not able to get even the basic necessities
of life. Corruption is another major reason which contributes towards poverty which ultimately
leads to increased instances of juvenile delinquency in society. Poor children often get involved in
stealing, robbery and other criminal activities to help their families with basic necessities. The
government must take initiatives to eradicate the problem of poverty and provide basic necessities
like food, clothing, shelter etc to its citizens. Efforts must be made to provide quality education and
quality training so that they can lead a good life in the future.
Other factors
Other factors like child labour, abusive childhood, traumatic experiences, financial issues, illiteracy,
unsoundness of mind etc are also responsible for delinquent behaviour in juveniles.
Juvenile justice in other countries
Juvenile justice in the U.K.
Juvenile delinquency in the United Kingdom was considered a transient phase meaning that it
would vanish with age. The penal reformists in the country adopted a different approach to the
treatment of juveniles. The Ragged Industrial School Movement is considered to be the first
initiative taken towards the prevention of juvenile delinquency. This movement led to the
establishment of an industrial school for homeless, destitute, and delinquent children.
Miss Marry Carpenter, a famous social activist, is known for the significant effort that she made
towards the prevention of delinquency in juveniles. She started a Ragged Industrial School in
Bristol. Further, in 1838, a Parkhurst prison was established for the treatment of juveniles. The
enactment of the Summary Jurisdiction Act, 1879 in the country, provided that a child under 7 years
of age is incapable of committing a crime and hence, must not be convicted. In 1907, the Probation
of Offenders Act, 1907 was enacted which empowered the courts to release juveniles in certain
offences. Finally, the Juvenile courts were established in 1908 under the Children Act, 1908. These
courts were empowered to deal with matters involving juveniles and take proper care and provide
protection to the young offender.
Further, the Children and Young Persons Act, 1933, provided remand homes for the treatment of
juveniles. Children below the age of 17 were kept in observation homes before the trial. It is noted
that after the enactment of the Criminal Justice Act, 1982, the U.K. government liberalised the law
relating to juveniles in order to abide by the guidelines of the United Nations in this regard.
Juvenile justice in the U.S.A
The history of juvenile courts in the USA starts with the appointment of state agents in 1869 who
were responsible for taking care of juveniles. In 1878, this work was given to probation officers.
Currently, each state in the country has one juvenile court and a specialised unit in the judicial
service to deal with such matters. These courts are provided financial support by the local
governments of each state. Further, Congress enacted the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency
Prevention Act of 1974 to tackle the issue of juvenile delinquency.
These courts function in the following manner:
Who are Juvenile Delinquents?
Juvenile delinquents are regularly youngsters between the ages of 10 and 17 who have carried out a
criminal demonstration. There are two principal sorts of guilty parties: rehash wrongdoers and age
particular guilty parties.
The police first take the custody of a child offender and decide whether to keep the child
in custody or not.
The next duty of the police officer is to inform the court.
During the trial, hearing is given to the probation officer as well.
It is the duty of a probation officer that when a child is under his supervision, he must
find a school or employment for the child. However, if the juvenile violates any condition
during probation, he is sent to a certified school or children’s home.
The practices that an adolescent shows amid youthfulness are frequently a decent marker of the
kind of guilty party he will progress toward becoming. While age-specific offenders leave their
delinquent behaviour behind when they enter adulthood, they often have more mental health
problems, engage in substance abuse, and have greater financial problems than adults who were
never delinquent as juveniles.
In the case of Gopinath Ghosh v. State of West Bengal, the accused had given his age as much above
the cut-off age prescribed for being a child. However, in this case, the court not only allowed the
plea of child status to be raised for the first time but also referred the matter to the sessions judge
for a determination of the age of the accused. Approving this approach, the Supreme Court in
Rajinder Chandra v State of Chhattisgarh, further laid down that the standard of proof for age
determination is the degree of probability and not proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
Risk Factors and Predictors of Juvenile
Delinquency
Numerous kids end up noticeably adolescent delinquents early, frequently between the ages of 6
and 12 years. Numerous adolescent practices amid the pre-high schooler and young years might be
viewed as ordinary conduct for kids, as they extend their limits, and battle to build up their self
discernment. There are, in any case, certain signs that a child may be going an awful way.
Indicators of adolescent misconduct may show up as ahead of schedule as preschool and
frequently include:
Studies have discovered that various life conditions constitute chance components for a youngster
to end up noticeably an adolescent reprobate. While these are numerous and changed, the most
well-known hazard factors for adolescent misconduct include:
Rehash Wrongdoers– rehash guilty parties are otherwise called “life-course constant
wrongdoers.” These adolescent delinquents start culpable or hinting at other solitary
conduct amid pre-adulthood. Rehash guilty parties keep on engaging in criminal exercises
or forceful practices even after they enter adulthood.
Age-particular guilty parties- Age-Specific Offenders indicate adolescent reprobate
conduct starts amid youthfulness. Not at all like the rehash wrongdoers, in any case, the
practices of the age-particular guilty party closes before the minor turns into a grown-up.
Abnormal or moderate advancement of essential abilities, for example, discourse and
dialect.
Chronic infringement of the principles.
Serious forceful conduct toward different understudies or instructors.
Authoritarian Parenting – characterized by the use of harsh disciplinary methods, and
refusal to justify disciplinary actions, other than by saying “because I said so.”
Peer Association – usually resulting from leaving adolescents unsupervised, encouraging
a child to engage in bad behaviours when acting with his peer group.
Low Socioeconomic Status
Permissive Parenting – characterized by lack of consequences for bad behaviour,
permissive parenting can be broken down into two subcategories: (1) neglectful
History and Evolution of Juvenile Delinquency
in India
Apprentices Act of 1850
It was the first legislation which was passed in the colonial period for dealing with children who had
done something in conflict with the law. According to this act, the children who have committed
some petty offences shall not be sent to prison but to treat them as apprentices i.e. a person who is
undergoing a course training in industry or under any establishment.
Stand of Indian Constitution
Article 15(3), Article 39 clause(e) and (f), Articles 45 and 47, force an essential duty of guaranteeing
the necessities of kids and of securing their fundamental Human Rights. The General Assembly of
the United Nations received the Convention on the Rights of the Child in November 1989 and laid
the norms to be trailed by all part States in ensuring the enthusiasm of the kid. It additionally
underscored on social reintegration of youngster casualties.
The Indian Penal Code Act, 1860 and Criminal Strategy Code, 1861 treated kids diversely through
different methodologies. Act XIX of 1850, 1876 Reformatory Schools Act, the Borstal School Act, the
Children’s Act of 1920, and other state-specific legislation like the Bengal Children’s Act, and
Madras Children’s Act to address neglected and deviant children these laws gave delinquents some
special provisions regarding their Institutionalization and rehabilitation.
The primary formal enactment on adolescent equity in India came in 1850 with the Apprentice Act,
1850 which required that youngsters between the ages of 10-18 indicted in courts to be given
professional preparation as a component of their recovery procedure. This demonstration was
transplanted by the Reformatory Schools Act, 1897 along these lines gave that youngsters up to the
age of 15 might be sent to the reformatory cell, and later the Juvenile Justice Act 1986 gave a
uniform component of Juvenile Justice. This demonstration was supplanted by the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection) Act, 2000.
Different Stages of Legislation
Juvenile Justice Act, 1986
Truth be told the indigenous speculation on Juvenile Justice has been staying informed concerning
the worldwide patterns in this field. With the reception of the United Nations Standard Minimum
Rules for the organization of Juvenile Justice, India was the main nation to advance its framework in
light of the standards articulated in that. Obviously, alternate targets were to lay down a uniform
parenting, which is a lack of monitoring a child’s activities, and (2) indulgent parenting,
which is the enablement of bad behaviour.
Poor School Performance
Peer Rejection
ADHD and other mental disorders
lawful structure for Juvenile Justice, to give a specific approach towards the counteractive action
and control of adolescent wrongdoing, to spell out the apparatus and framework for Juvenile
Justice operations, to build up standards and measures for the organization of Juvenile Justice, to
create proper linkages and coordination between the formal framework and deliberate offices and
to constitute unique offences in connection to adolescents and to recommend discipline thereof.
Keeping in mind the end goal to understand this objective, the Act soaks up the basic components
of all the due procedures and participatory models. The new law without a doubt puts a difficult
obligation on the state to properly outfit the assets from different segments of financial
advancement in guaranteeing the prosperity and welfare of adolescents and an opportunity to
recover from the struggle they went through.
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2000
The JJ Act 1986 required that the prior framework worked around the execution of the thenaccessible Children’s Acts be rebuilt. Be that as it may, because of the non-attendance of national
accord on the time span for such a rebuilding, the means taken by a large portion of the State
Governments were still intensely shy of the declared objectives. So as to support and
institutionalize the approach towards adolescent equity with regards to the significant
arrangements of the Constitution of India and International commitments in such manner, the
Government of India re-enacted the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of the Children) Act,
2000. For this, a Working Group was set up and the Act has been implemented since April 1, 2001,
to manage the kids inside its domain.
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015
Adolescent Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 means to supersede the existing
Indian adolescent misconduct law i.e. Adolescent Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2000, with the goal that adolescent criminals under the age gathering of 16– 18 can be attempted
as grown-ups for genuine wrongdoings. It was passed on 7 May 2015 by the Lok Sabha consistently
and it is currently pending in the Rajya Sabha. Adolescent Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2014 will permit a Juvenile Justice Board, which would incorporate analysts and sociologists,
to choose whether an adolescent criminal in the age gathering of 16– 18 should attempt as a grownup or not. The bill presented ideas from the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and
Cooperation in Respect of Inter-Country Adoption, 1993 which were absent in the past
demonstration. The bill likewise tries to influence the selection to the procedure of stranded,
deserted and surrendered kids more streamlined.
The United Nations in 1989 adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child in 1989, for the
protection of the rights of children. This convention was ratified by India in 1992. Further, the
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985, also
known as the Beijing Rules, and the United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile
Delinquency, 1990, also known as the Riyadh Guidelines, provided certain guidelines to be followed
in cases of juvenile delinquency. The fundamental principles in this regard include the presumption
of innocence, the right to be heard, positive rehabilitation, proper care and avoiding maltreatment
of juveniles, etc.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, was enacted keeping in mind
Article 15(3), Article 39(e) and 39(f), Article 45 and Article 47 of the Indian Constitution.
Objectives of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act, 2015
The objectives of the Act are:
Categories of children recognised under the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
The Act recognises two categories of juveniles:
Children in conflict with the law
Section 2(13) of the Act defines ‘children in conflict with law’. According to the definition given in
the Section, any child who commits an offence or is alleged to have committed it and has not
completed 18 years of age, is included in the category of children in conflict with the law. The Act
also provides provisions and makes it mandatory that no such child be subject to any kind of harm,
abuse, neglect, corporal punishment, or maltreatment. Apart from this, no accusatory words like
arrest, remand, accused, etc. can be used during the trial of a juvenile nor can they be referred to
with such words.
Children in need of care and protection
Section 2(14) defines the category of children in need of care and protection. The following children
are included under its ambit:
The Act is enacted with the aim to amend and consolidate the law related to categories of
children covered under the Act.
It tries to provide basic needs, protection, care, development and treatment of such
children.
The Act adopted a child-friendly approach for adjudication and disposal of matters
involving juveniles.
To ensure that such children are reintegrated back into society.
The Act also provides provisions for aftercare programmes and the establishment of
organisations to help young offenders become sober citizens.
Children in conflict with the law.
Children who need care and protection
A child who is rendered homeless and there are no means of sustaining.
A child who is involved in child labour or any activity contravening the labour laws or
found begging or living on streets.
A child living with another person:
Juvenile Justice Board
Section 4 of the Act provides for the constitution of a Juvenile Justice Board for hearing matters
involving juveniles. The power to constitute the board in each district is given to the state
government. It consists of:
However, a person will not be eligible for selection by the board on the following grounds, as given
under Section 4(4) of the Act:
Termination of appointment
A member of the board will be terminated on the following grounds, as given under Section 4(7) of
the Act:
Who abused, exploited, injured and neglected him,
Who threatened to kill him,
Who has killed, abused, injured or exploited any other child and there is a reasonable
apprehension that he or she might do the same with another child.
A child with an unsound mind or mental illness and one who is physically challenged and
has no body to care for.
A child having parents or guardians but they are unfit or unable to care and protect him
or her.
A child who does not have parents and no one is willing to take care of or one who is
abandoned or surrendered by his or her parents.
A child who ran away from home and whose parents cannot be found even after a
reasonable inquiry.
A child who has been, is being, or is likely to be sexually abused or indulged in illegal or
unlawful acts.
A child who is used or abused for unconscionable gains.
A child who was a victim of any armed conflict, civil unrest or natural disaster.
A child who is forced into marriage before attaining the age of puberty by the parents,
relatives or guardians.
A Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of First Class with three years of
experience who will be referred as the principal magistrate.
Two social workers and one of them should be a woman. They must be involved in health,
education and welfare activities for children with seven years of experience or have a
professional degree of law, sociology, psychiatry or child psychology.
If he has violated any human rights or rights of children.
If the person is convicted of an offence related to or which involves moral turpitude.
Removed or dismissed from government services.
The person was involved in child abuse or child labour.
The members of the board abused or misused the powers and authority.
The member did not attend the meeting for three months consecutively without any
reasons.
If the member did not attend 3/4th sittings in a year.
If the member does any act because of which he becomes ineligible.
Powers and functions of the board
Section 8 of the Act gives the powers and functions of the board:
Child welfare committee
Section 27 of the Act provides that a child welfare committee must be constituted in every district
by the state government. This committee must be empowered to work for the welfare of children
who need care and protection. Such a committee must consist of:
The District Magistrate is empowered under the Act to take review from the committee and look
upon its functioning. He or she will also act as the grievance redressal authority under the Act. The
Act provides that the members of the committee can be terminated on the following grounds:
Functions of the committee
Section 30 of the Act provides the functions of the committee:
It is the duty of the board to ensure that the child or his guardians participate in the trial.
Another duty of the board is to ensure that no rights of children are violated during the
entire process.
It is the duty of the board to provide legal aid to the child with the help of legal services
institutions in the district and state.
To provide the interpreter or translator to the child if necessary.
The board can direct the probation officer or the child welfare officer in his absence to
investigate the case and submit a report within 15 days. The report must contain the
circumstances under which the offence was committed.
The board has a duty to adjudicate and dispose of the cases related to juveniles.
The board has a duty to visit the residential places where juveniles are kept and make
recommendations for their improvement to the District Child Protection Unit.
It can order police to register FIR of the offences committed against children covered
under the Act.
A chairperson;
Four other members, out of whom at least one should be a woman;
The tenure of the members in the committee is three years.
Any member abused or misused the powers and authority.
The member did not attend the meeting for three consecutive months without any
reason.
If the member did not attend 3/4th sittings in a year.
Take cognizance of children produced before it.
To conduct inquiries regarding the health and safety of children.
To direct the probation officers, child welfare officers, or district child protection unit to
investigate the matter related to such children.
To conduct an enquiry with respect to people taking care of such children and deciding
whether they are fit to do so.
The committee has a duty to direct the placement of children that are in foster care.
Following is the table statistics showing the recent development in comparison mode
Claim of juvenility
The first and foremost question that the juvenile board is required to determine in any case that
comes before it, is the age of the child and whether he or she is a juvenile according to the Act. This
To ensure the care, protection, rehabilitation and restoration of such children.
To select institutions for placement of such children keeping in mind their gender,
disability and needs.
To inspect the premises where such children are kept once in a month.
To certify the execution of surrender deed given by parents and ensure that they are
given sufficient time for making the decision.
Make required efforts for the welfare of children abandoned or lost.
The committee can declare an abandoned or surrendered child as an orphan and look for
his or her adoption.
The committee also has the power to take suo moto cognizance of matters related to
such children.
The committee has to work for the rehabilitation of children who are abused sexually.
It is empowered to coordinate with the police and other institutions for the welfare of
such children.
It is the duty of the committee to provide legal services to children who are abused.
Juveniles between 16-18 years apprehended under
IPC
Crime 2003 2013
Burglary 1,160 2,117
Rape 293 1,388
Kidnapping/abduction 156 933
Robbery 165 880
Murder 328 845
Other offences 11,839 19,641
Total 13,941 25,804
Note: Other offences include cheating, rioting, etc. Sources: Juveniles in
conflict with the law, Crime in India 2013, National Crime Records Bureau; PRS.
claim of juvenility can be raised by the person at any stage during the trial before any court and
even after the matter has been disposed of. However, there have been a plethora of cases on this
issue of juvenility and how the age of a juvenile should be determined in a case involving him or her.
In the case of Kulai Ibrahim @ Ibrahim v. State represented by I.G. Police, Coimbatore (2014), the
appellant was convicted under Section 148 and Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, with
life imprisonment. This conviction was challenged in the Supreme Court on the ground that on the
date on which the offence was committed, the appellant was a juvenile and must not be convicted.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court observed that this plea of juvenility was not raised by the appellant in
the trial court but raised only in the High Court. Due to lack of evidence in this regard, the High
Court had to reject the plea. However, it was further observed that according to Section 7A of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, the accused has a right to raise this
plea at any stage during the trial. He also has the option of raising it after the disposal of the case.
In the case of Deoki Nandan v. State of Uttar Pradesh (1996), the Supreme Court held that the
school certificate can be used as evidence to determine the age of the child and is admissible in
court. Further, in the case of Ajay Pratap Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh (2000), the High Court
had to set aside the charges against the accused because no proper inquiry was done to determine
his exact age.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Satbir Singh and others v. State of Haryana (2005),
reiterated that in order to determine the age of the accused and whether he or she is a juvenile, the
date of birth of the child as mentioned in the school register can be taken into consideration. In the
case of Panna Lal and Others v. State of Madhya Pradesh (2015), four people, along with a juvenile,
were charged with the offence of murder. However, the case of the juvenile was separated from the
other accused and handed over to the juvenile justice board.
Rehabilitation of delinquent juveniles
The main objective of the juvenile justice system in the country is to restore and rehabilitate young
offenders back into society as sober citizens. Thus, the treatment of juveniles becomes important.
The Act provides that no child will be subject to any cruelty, abuse, or harsh treatment and
establishes institutions like observation homes, shelter homes, etc. for their reformation. The
following institutions can be helpful to achieve the purpose:
Observation homes
According to Section 47 of the Act, juveniles in custody during the inquiry or pendency of trial are
to be kept in observation homes. These homes provide for the treatment of juveniles and children
who are in need of care.
Special homes
According to Section 48 of the Act, a special home is to be established by the state government in
every district for the juveniles and those who have been ordered to live in these homes by the
juvenile justice board during their trial. The aim of these homes is the social reintegration of such
children and juveniles. However, the authorities have the power to separate the juveniles living in
these homes on the basis of their gender, age, nature of the offence committed etc.
Children’s home
Section 50 of the Act empowers the state government to establish a home for children who are in
need of care and protection. This can be done with the help of voluntary groups and nongovernmental organisations. These homes provide care and protection to such children and work
towards their development, treatment, education, and training.
Aftercare programmes
These programmes aid and support juveniles and children to lead a normal life after they are
released from observation homes or special homes or other homes established under the Act. For
example, the government or NGOs can provide financial support to such juveniles to establish their
means of livelihood. Apart from this, the Act also provides for the adoption of children in need of
care and protection under Section 56 of Chapter VIII of the Act.
Preventive programmes for juvenile
delinquency
Education
Education is essential to shape a person’s life. If quality education is imparted to the children and
youngsters, they can become assets for the country and contribute towards its growth and
development. The aim of every government must be to provide quality education and guidance to
its younger generation. These programmes not only help the children choose their career path but
also open opportunities for them to shine and use their energy in a proper manner.
Recreational activities
A famous saying that “all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy” is actually true. Recreational and
fun activities can contribute towards the growth of children and help in preventing delinquent
behaviour. With the help of these activities, children can be engaged in fun yet intellectual activities
which will also give them a chance to interact with peers, counsellors, teachers, businessmen,
motivational speakers, and other eminent personalities. These people can help them understand
how to differentiate between right and wrong.
Parent-children interaction
Children are usually sensitive by nature. It is important that their parents interact with them and
create a friendly environment at homes where they are not hesitant or scared to share their
problems, thoughts and opinions. They must not be abused or harassed in any manner because if
done so, it would have a negative impact on their mental growth.
Community services
Children must be engaged in community services like helping people in need through scouts, youth
groups, and NGOs. It would also imbibe in them the values of helping and respecting each other,
honesty, and truthfulness, and make them responsible citizens.
Anti-ragging programmes or anti-bullying programmes
Ragging or bullying had negative and adverse effects on the minds of children. Initiatives were taken
by the government to stop these activities.The Central Board of Secondary Education in India
issued guidelines to schools to establish a committee to ensure an anti-ragging culture in schools
and that there must be a counsellor in every school. Further, in 2007, the Ministry of Human
Resource Development constituted the Raghavan Committee on the issue of increasing bullying
and ragging incidents in colleges and universities. In 2009, the University Grants Commission (UGC)
issued regulations to prevent and reduce the menace of ragging in universities and higher education
institutions. Due to all these initiatives, ragging is completely prohibited and punishable.
Recent case laws
Narayan Chetanram Chaudhary v. State of Maharashtra
(2023)
Facts of the case
The appellant in this case filed an application for claiming the plea of juvenility that at the time of
commission of offence, he was a juvenile. The appellant was convicted under Sections 302, 342, 397
and 449 read with 120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. It was argued that at the time of the
commission of the offence, he was a juvenile, and thus, he cannot be awarded with death penalty.
The issue involved in the case
Whether the claim of juvenility in this case, be accepted or not?
Judgement of the Court
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in this case observed that the convict was already in prison for more
than 28 years. He had faced severe limitations and difficulties during the time he was in jail. It would
even have been difficult for him to find his school certificate as proof of his age for the plea of
juvenility. The court further observed that his age in the school certificate was mentioned as 12
years, which means he was a juvenile at the time of the commission of offence and hence, the court
accepted this certificate to determine his age. Thus, the court, in this case, held that since he has
already been in jail and served imprisonment, and according to the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015, no juvenile can be awarded the death penalty and hence, the
order of death penalty passed by the lower court was invalidated.
Reserved on: 12.04.2022 v. Union Territory of J&K
(2022)
Facts of the case
This case pertains to an order of a lower court which set aside the order granting bail to a juvenile. A
revision petition was filed by the petitioners in the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir against the
judgement of the lower court i.e., Court of Principal Sessions Judge, Kulgam. The petitioners argued
that the court misinterpreted the law and passed the erroneous judgement, ignoring the law related
to juveniles.
The issue involved in the case
Whether the said order setting aside the grant of interim bail to the juvenile, in this case, should be
set aside or not.
Judgement of the Court
The petitioner argued that neither Section 8, Section 15 nor Section 18 of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 provides any provision that has to be considered while
granting bail to a juvenile. Also, no investigation report is required to be submitted in this regard. It
was further contended that the lower court failed to consider the observations of the Juvenile
Justice Board and the procedure followed therein. The Jammu and Kashmir High Court in this case
held that Section 12 of the Act is clear and unambiguous, and so the lower court’s order to cancel
the order granting bail to a juvenile was set aside.
Anuj Kumar v. State of U.P. (2021)
Facts of the case
The petitioner applied for the post of constable and also passed the required written examination
and the physical test. However, after the appointment, an inquiry was conducted by the Senior
Superintendent of Police regarding the criminal history of the petitioner. It was found that the
petitioner had once faced criminal prosecution, as a result of which, his appointment was refused.
Aggrieved by this, the petitioner filed a writ petition in the court to set aside the cancellation of his
appointment. He contended that he was a juvenile when he faced criminal prosecution and so must
not be disqualified from the appointment.
Issues involved in the case
The issues involved in the case are:
Judgement of the Court
The Allahabad High Court in this case observed that even though the plea of juvenility was not
raised by the petitioner during the criminal prosecution, this does not negate the fact that he was a
juvenile when he faced the trial. According to the Juvenile Justice Act, all the charges against him
are to be put down and he must not face any kind of disqualification because of the criminal
prosecution. The court held that the appointment of the petitioner in this case cannot be cancelled
Whether the petitioner was juvenile when he faced criminal prosecution;
Is the refusal of his appointment correct?
merely on the ground of criminal prosecution. The Court issued a writ of mandamus against the
respondent authority and gave the following directions:
Critical Analysis and Recommendations
It isn’t sufficient to order elegant laws, however, the execution ought to be finished and culminate.
Under the watchful eye of bringing the law into constraint, the enactment ought to consider the
foundation required to actualize the law and money-related consequences associated with
executing the law. With no discourse with regard to the likelihood/possibility of the usage, laws are
brought into drive immediately. Subsequently, there is disappointment in the execution of the laws.
Suggestions and Recommendations
Children and protection had been accepted as the responsibilities of modern welfare. Through
social welfare programs and the JJ Act, States have undertaken the responsibility of ensuring
developmental opportunities to children living in conditions of want and showing signs of social
maladjustment. But the fragmented implementation and malfunctioning of the various organs
under the JJ Act have brushed off the basic fundamental principle of different policies. Hence there
is a need to transform this approach towards juvenile justice into a ‘system’ of juvenile justice. The
first and foremost requirement is to think clearly about the direction of change.
The respondents were directed to appoint the petitioner to the required post.
This appointment must be done in accordance with the law.
He must be given the same post for which he qualified.
1.  Formulation of Minimum Standards- A child cannot develop into a normal human being
by the normal provision of food, shelter and clothing. It is necessary to formulate
minimum standards of services for various community and institutional services for
children under the JJ Act. The qualifications, salary structure, staff pattern, the
architecture of the building, and other factors should be in accordance with the objective
of providing alternative family care to the juveniles, ultimately leading to their
rehabilitation in society.
2.  National Commission for Children– A national commission for children’s welfare was
suggested by the high-level committee constituted by the Supreme Court in a public
interest petition for basic facilities for children engaged in the fireworks industry in
Madras and Sivakasi in the early 1990s. The government has reiterated its desire to
constitute one on several occasions subsequently, but one has still to be constituted.
3.  Strategy for Change– Probation and other community-based programs cost less than
institutionalization. They should also be preferred for their potential for ensuring better
care and rehabilitation for juveniles. The state has paid some attention to children but
other more demanding pressure groups and priorities deemed necessary have been able
to divert the resources for their causes.
4.  Special Training Programme-A special training program must be prepared and the
officers of the Board including the Principal Magistrate should be given training of child
psychology and child welfare.
5.  Sports and Functional Programmes-For better welfare of juvenile games, sports and
other functional programs may be organized in observation homes and institutions and
encourage the juvenile to participate in these programs so they connect themselves with
Conclusion
For the development of any country, it is necessary that adequate attention is paid to the growth
and development of the human resources i.e., its future generation. Initiatives must be taken by the
government to introduce quality education and training for its citizens and must impart the same to
them. Various Schemes must be introduced to provide education to those children who are unable
to pay school or college fees. Apart from this, other aspects like health, safety and welfare of such
children must also be taken care of. Most of the states are welfare states and so the focus must be
to reform and rehabilitate young offenders rather than awarding harsh punishments.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 helps to achieve this purpose as it
provides provisions for the development, treatment, correction, and reintegration of children who
have committed any kind of offence or who are in need of care and protection. The Act provides
separate machinery and authority to deal with juvenile matters, which makes the whole process
easy and speedy. It also aims at providing protection to children who have been abused or harassed
in any manner. However, efforts must be made for the strict implementation of the Act. Any person
who contravenes the provisions of the Act must be punished. This can help reduce crimes against
children.
The Government of India has introduced numerous schemes in this regard which include the most
famous scheme of Atmanirbhar Bharat to help the youth become self-reliant and independent and
use their aptitude and intellect for the benefit of oneself and the country at large. Other such
initiatives include Ujjawala with the aim to reduce the cases of child trafficking, the National Youth
Policy 2021, the National Education Policy 2020, and many more.
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
society. During festival seasons some cultural programs should be organized in the
homes for the inmates with the assistance of voluntary organizations.
6.  Education and Schooling– Schooling of children in homes up to the age of 14 should be
made compulsory. They should be given the best of the facilities and opportunities like
any Boarding school (hostel) making a course of moral science and civics compulsory for
those who are in homes. For the welfare of the juvenile, he must be allowed to go on leave
and released on license during the examination so that he can continue with his studies.
Sponsorships should be provided for the education of juveniles in good institutions.
Personality enhancement courses should be organized.
7.  Courses and Seminars-Orientation courses, seminars and awareness programs should be
organized by the government on juvenile justice on regular intervals to enable the
functionaries to imbibe the message discussed and conveyed to them.
8.  Providing Assistance-A social worker may be associated with the investigation made by
the police officer. In the child cell, at least one lady police officer should be posted.
9.  Needed Change-Unless a more effective lobby is generated for children, it may not be
possible to bring about a change in the policy towards children whether for the purposes
of finding resources or for implementing the statutory provisions or for a continuous
review of policy and implementation patterns relating to children.
What are the orders that a juvenile justice board
cannot make?
According to Section 21 of the Act, the board is prohibited from making the following orders against
a juvenile:
Is a juvenile disqualified from exercising his or her
rights after conviction like any other adult convict?
No, according to Section 24 of the Act, no juvenile would be disqualified from anything pertaining to
his conviction under the Act for any offence committed.
Can a juvenile be released on bail?
Yes. According to Section 12 of the Act, if a juvenile is apprehended by police, the general rule is
that a he or she is entitled to bail with or without surety both in bailable or non-bailable offences.
However, if there are reasonable grounds that granting him or her bail would be dangerous then no
bail wou;d be granted but the board has to record reasons for the same.
How is the juvenile justice system different from the
criminal justice system?
The juvenile justice system and the criminal justice system possess certain differences:
References
Order awarding a juvenile the death penalty;
Order of punishing the juvenile with life imprisonment;
Any order that imposes a sentence of a specific period on the juvenile in default of
payment of fine;
Order awarding punishment to a juvenile on the failure of payment of security.
In the juvenile justice system, no First Information Report (FIR) or chargesheet is filed
against the accused which is a juvenile or minor in this case. However, in the criminal
justice system, FIR and charge sheet are important to start a trial against the accused.
The accused in criminal cases can be arrested by police but a juvenile accused of
committing an offence cannot be arrested in the juvenile justice system.
Juveniles are not awarded punishment like death penalty, life imprisonment or sentence
for a specific period in the jail but can be kept in special homes or observation homes.
Under the juvenile justice system, the Juvenile Justice Board is empowered to hear and
dispose of cases related to juveniles unlike the criminal justice system where this power
is vested with the courts.
Juveniles are entitled to bail but an accused in the criminal justice system may or may
not be entitled to bail depending on the nature and gravity of the offence committed.
Same Sex Marriages in India: A complete
overview
Same-sex marriages refer to marriages between two individuals of the
same gender. In India, same-sex marriages are not currently legal, although
there are ongoing efforts to recognize and legalize them. This topic is
important because it relates to the fundamental human rights of LGBTQ+
individuals and the recognition and protection of their relationships.
Legalizing same-sex marriage would not only provide legal recognition and
protection for LGBTQ+ couples but also promote greater social
acceptance and reduce discrimination against the community. It is an
important issue for LGBTQ+ rights activists and advocates around the
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5288089/#:~:text=Juvenile%20delinquen
cy%20is%20a%20term,according%20to%20the%20local%20jurisdiction.
http://ignited.in/a/57753
https://www.thelawgurukul.com/post/juvenile-delinquency-causes-and-prevention
https://www.nap.edu/read/9747/chapter/5
https://www.penalreform.org/blog/juvenile-delinquency-causes-prevention-and-theways-of/
https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/united-nationsguidelines-prevention-juvenile-delinquency-riyadh
https://www.britannica.com/topic/juvenile-delinquent
https://blog.ipleaders.in/introduction-overview-juvenile-justice-care-protection-act2015/
https://thelegalquotient.com/criminal-laws/juvenile-justice-act/objects-of-juvenilejustice-act/1370/
https://www.latestlaws.com/articles/all-about-juvenile-justice-act-2015-care-andprotection-of-children-by-kavisha-gupta
https://prsindia.org/billtrack/the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-bill2014
https://www.thelawgurukul.com/post/juvenile-delinquency-causes-and-prevention
https://youth.gov/youth-topics/juvenile-justice/prevention-and-early-intervention
https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/united-nationsguidelines-prevention-juvenile-delinquency-riyadh
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21338003/
https://ijalr.in/volume-3/issue-1/prevention-and-control-of-juvenile-delinquency-inindia-a-need-to-re-look-at-the-loopholes-in-the-laws-dealing-with-juveniledelinquency-by-shubham-dutta/
https://www.penalreform.org/blog/juvenile-delinquency-causes-prevention-and-theways-of/
world, and its significance extends beyond the legal sphere to broader
social and cultural attitudes towards the LGBTQ+ community.
The Indian legal system does not recognize same-sex marriages, and the
country’s laws define marriage as a union between a man and a woman.
Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which criminalized homosexuality,
was struck down by the Supreme Court of India in 2018, which was a major
victory for LGBTQ+ rights in the country. However, the decriminalization of
homosexuality did not legalize same-sex marriages. Several legal cases
have been filed in Indian courts seeking to legalize same-sex marriage, but
as of now, the courts have not yet granted legal recognition to same-sex
couples. In 2017, the Delhi High Court declared that same-sex couples are
entitled to be in a stable relationship, but stopped short of legalizing
same-sex marriage.
There have been some recent developments in the Indian legal system
that could have implications for the future of same-sex marriages in India.
In 2020, the Indian government introduced the Personal Data Protection
Bill, which includes a provision that recognizes the right to privacy as a
fundamental right. Some legal experts believe that this provision could be
used to argue for the legalization of same-sex marriage, as it recognizes the
right of individuals to have control over their personal lives.
The history of LGBTQ+ rights in India dates back to the colonial era when
the British introduced Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code in 1860, which
criminalized homosexual acts. This law remained in place even after India
gained independence in 1947, and it continued to be used to discriminate
against and prosecute LGBTQ+ individuals for over a century.
However, the struggle for LGBTQ+ rights in India gained momentum in the
late 20th century. In the 1990s, the first LGBTQ+ organization, the AIDS
Bhedbhav Virodhi Andolan (ABVA), was founded in Delhi to fight against
discrimination and violence faced by the LGBTQ+ community. In 2001, the
Naz Foundation, a non-governmental organization, filed a public interest
litigation (PIL) in the Delhi High Court challenging the constitutionality of
Section 377. Despite facing significant opposition from conservative groups
and religious leaders, the LGBTQ+ community and their allies continued to
fight for their rights, and in 2009, the Delhi High Court declared Section
377 unconstitutional and decriminalized homosexuality. However, this
decision was overturned by the Supreme Court of India in 2013, which
reinstated Section 377.
In 2018, a five-judge bench of the Supreme Court of India declared Section
377 unconstitutional, overturning the previous decision and
decriminalizing homosexuality once again. This was a major victory for
LGBTQ+ rights in India and a significant step towards ending discrimination
and promoting equality. However, despite these legal victories, the
LGBTQ+ community in India still faces significant challenges.
Discrimination and violence against LGBTQ+ individuals remain prevalent
in Indian society, and many continue to face stigma and marginalization
from their families, communities, and workplaces. Transgender individuals,
in particular, face multiple forms of discrimination, including limited
access to education, employment, healthcare, and housing.
Moreover, the legal recognition of same-sex marriage remains a distant
dream for LGBTQ+ couples in India. The lack of legal recognition not only
denies them legal and social benefits but also increases the risk of
discrimination and violence.
There have been several key events in India that have shaped the country’s
approach to LGBTQ+ rights over the years. Here are a few of the most
significant:
§ Introduction of Section 377: In 1860, the British colonial government
introduced Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which criminalized sexual
activities “against the order of nature” and effectively criminalized
homosexuality.
§ Founding of LGBTQ+ organizations: In the 1990s, the first LGBTQ+
organization, the AIDS Bhedbhav Virodhi Andolan (ABVA), was founded in
Delhi to fight against discrimination and violence faced by the LGBTQ+
community.
§ Naz Foundation’s PIL: In 2001, the Naz Foundation, a non-governmental
organization, filed a public interest litigation (PIL) in the Delhi High Court
challenging the constitutionality of Section 377.
§ Delhi High Court’s 2009 judgment: In 2009, the Delhi High Court
declared Section 377 unconstitutional and decriminalized homosexuality.
§ Supreme Court’s 2013 decision: In 2013, the Supreme Court of India
overturned the Delhi High Court’s judgment and reinstated Section 377,
criminalizing homosexuality once again.
§ Supreme Court’s 2018 decision: In 2018, a five-judge bench of the
Supreme Court of India declared Section 377 unconstitutional, overturning
the previous decision and decriminalizing homosexuality once again.
§ Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act: In 2019, the Transgender
Persons (Protection of Rights) Act was passed, which aimed to protect the
rights of transgender individuals and provide them with legal recognition.
Despite legal victories, same-sex marriage remains unrecognized in India,
denying LGBTQ+ couples legal and social benefits. These events have
played a significant role in shaping India’s approach to LGBTQ+ rights, from
the criminalization of homosexuality to the decriminalization and eventual
legal recognition of LGBTQ+ individuals. However, challenges and
discrimination still persist, and there is a need for continued advocacy and
activism to ensure equal rights and protection for the LGBTQ+ community
in India.
Currently, same-sex marriage is not recognized in India. The country’s legal
system does not provide for marriage equality and the rights and benefits
that come with it, such as inheritance rights, joint property ownership, and
adoption rights. The landmark decision of Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of
India, delivered by the Supreme Court in 2018, decriminalized
homosexuality in India by striking down Section 377 of the Indian Penal
Code. This has been a significant milestone for the LGBTQ+ community in
India, recognizing their right to love and intimacy without fear of
persecution or prosecution.
However, the LGBTQ+ community still faces significant challenges in India
due to societal discrimination, lack of legal recognition, and limited
protection under the law. Transgender individuals, in particular, face
widespread discrimination and social exclusion. The Transgender Persons
(Protection of Rights) Act, passed in 2019, has been criticized by many
activists and experts as it fails to provide adequate protection and legal
recognition for transgender individuals. The Indian legal system has taken
some steps to recognize and protect the rights of the LGBTQ+ community.
For instance, the National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) judgment in
2014 recognized the right to self-identification and legal recognition of
gender identity for transgender individuals. Additionally, the Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, is gender-neutral and includes
same-sex couples.
The decriminalization of homosexuality in India, through the landmark
Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India judgment in 2018, has had a significant
impact on the LGBTQ+ community in the country. It has marked a historic
shift towards recognizing the fundamental rights and freedoms of LGBTQ+
individuals in India. Before the ruling, homosexuality was criminalized
under Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which had been in place since
colonial times. This law had been used to harass, intimidate, and
discriminate against LGBTQ+ individuals, and had a severe impact on their
lives, including limiting their access to healthcare, education, and
employment opportunities. The decriminalization of homosexuality has
ended this criminalization and has allowed for greater acceptance and
visibility of the LGBTQ+ community.
One of the most significant impacts of decriminalization has been the
increased visibility of LGBTQ+ individuals and their rights. It has led to a
greater understanding and acceptance of same-sex relationships and
sexual orientations, challenging the traditional societal norms and beliefs
that have stigmatized LGBTQ+ individuals. This has also encouraged the
LGBTQ+ community to come forward and openly identify themselves
without fear of legal prosecution. The decriminalization of homosexuality
has also created opportunities for the LGBTQ+ community to advocate for
their rights and demand legal recognition and protections. This has led to
increased activism and advocacy efforts by LGBTQ+ organizations and
allies, leading to greater public awareness and support for LGBTQ+ rights
in India.
However, while the decriminalization of homosexuality is a significant
milestone for the LGBTQ+ community in India, it is only the first step
towards achieving full equality and legal recognition. There is still much
work to be done to address the discrimination and marginalization faced
by LGBTQ+ individuals, including addressing legal and policy gaps and
changing societal attitudes. Overall, the decriminalization of
homosexuality has had a significant impact on the LGBTQ+ community in
India, marking a significant shift towards greater acceptance, visibility, and
advocacy for their rights and freedoms.
Proponents of legalizing same-sex marriage argue that denying individuals
the right to marry based on their sexual orientation is a violation of their
fundamental rights and freedoms. They make several arguments in
support of the cause. Firstly, they argue that denying individuals the right
to marry based on their sexual orientation is a violation of their
fundamental rights and freedoms and that all individuals, regardless of
their sexual orientation, should have the right to choose who they marry
and should be allowed to enjoy the same legal benefits and protections as
heterosexual couples. Secondly, that legalizing it would promote equality
and inclusivity in society as denial of same-sex marriage perpetuates
discrimination against the LGBTQ+ community, which is already
marginalized and faces social and legal challenges. Legalizing same-sex
marriage would provide equal rights and protections to all individuals,
regardless of their sexual orientation, and would help in creating a more
equitable society. Thirdly, proponents of same-sex marriage argue that it
would benefit the society as a whole as legalizing same-sex marriage would
have a positive impact on the mental health and well-being of LGBTQ+
individuals, who currently face high rates of discrimination, harassment,
and violence. Additionally, it would help in creating a more accepting and
tolerant society and would reduce the stigma and discrimination that the
LGBTQ+ community currently faces. Lastly, it is consistent with the
principles of secularism and democracy, which India is founded on as the
Indian constitution guarantees equality and freedom to all citizens,
regardless of their sexual orientation, and legalizing same-sex marriage is a
necessary step towards fulfilling this promise of the constitution.
On the other hand, opponents of legalizing same-sex marriage argue that
marriage is a sacred institution that is defined as a union between a man
and a woman. They believe that changing the definition of marriage to
include same-sex couples would undermine traditional family values and
the institution of marriage. They argue that the primary purpose of
marriage is to procreate and raise children, and that same-sex couples
cannot fulfil this purpose, thus making their union fundamentally different
from that of opposite-sex couples. Secondly, it would have a negative
impact on children raised by same-sex couples. They argue that children
need both a mother and a father to have a well-rounded upbringing and
that same-sex couples cannot provide this. They claim that children raised
by same-sex couples are more likely to have emotional and behavioural
problems, and that legalizing same-sex marriage would promote the
adoption of children by same-sex couples, which they argue would be
detrimental to the child’s well-being. Thirdly, that legalizing it would lead
to a breakdown of social norms as it would pave the way for other forms of
unconventional relationships and would ultimately threaten the country’s
cultural and religious traditions. They believe that same-sex marriage is
not consistent with the Indian cultural and religious beliefs, and that
legalizing it would be a step towards westernization and would lead to the
erosion of traditional values. Lastly, opponents of same-sex marriage argue
that the majority of the Indian population does not support it as the
traditional values of the country are under threat and that legalizing samesex marriage would go against the beliefs and opinions of the majority of
the population.
It is important to note that these arguments are not unique to India and
have been made in other countries as well.
The issue of same-sex marriage in India is complex and involves various
cultural, religious, and legal perspectives. The cultural and religious
perspectives are deeply ingrained in Indian society and are often cited as a
reason for opposing same-sex marriage. From a cultural perspective,
marriage is considered a sacred institution in India. It is viewed as a social
contract between two families and is seen as a way to continue family
lineage and traditions. Traditional Indian society is largely conservative,
and same-sex relationships are not widely accepted. LGBTQ+ individuals
are often stigmatized and discriminated against, and their relationships are
viewed as unnatural. From a religious perspective, many of the major
religions in India, including Hinduism, Islam, and Christianity, consider
homosexuality to be a sin. These religions view marriage as a union
between a man and a woman, and same-sex marriage is not recognized.
From a legal perspective, same-sex marriage is not currently recognized in
India. The Indian Constitution does not explicitly mention sexual
orientation, and homosexuality was decriminalized in 2018 by the Supreme
Court, but same-sex marriage is still not legal. LGBTQ+ individuals do not
have the same legal rights as heterosexual couples, including the right to
marriage, adoption, and inheritance.
LGBTQ+ activists and organizations in India have been working tirelessly to
promote greater legal recognition and protection of their rights. Here are
some of the efforts being made:
§ Legal Challenges: LGBTQ+ activists and organizations have been
challenging Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which criminalized
homosexuality, for years. In 2018, the Supreme Court finally struck down
the law, decriminalizing homosexuality in India.
§ Advocacy and Awareness: Several LGBTQ+ organizations are working
towards creating awareness and advocating for greater rights and
protections for the community. They organize rallies, protests, and
campaigns to raise awareness of issues faced by the community and to
promote equality and acceptance.
§ Policy and Legal Reforms: Organizations like the Naz Foundation and the
Humsafar Trust are working towards policy and legal reforms to protect
the rights of the LGBTQ+ community. They are advocating for antidiscrimination laws, inclusive policies, and legal recognition of same-sex
relationships, including marriage.
§ Counselling and Support: Several organizations provide counselling and
support services to the LGBTQ+ community. These services help
individuals deal with issues such as discrimination, bullying, and mental
health problems.
§ Community Building: LGBTQ+ organizations are also working towards
building a sense of community and support within the community. They
organize events, social gatherings, and support groups to create a safe and
welcoming space for the community.
The Indian government and judiciary have played a significant role in
shaping the country’s approach to LGBTQ+ rights and same-sex marriage.
And are resonating back to the efforts and cries of the activists with a
positive and understanding approach. Here are some of the key
developments:
§ Decriminalization of Homosexuality: In September 2018, the Indian
Supreme Court struck down Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code, which
criminalized homosexuality. This was a significant milestone for LGBTQ+
rights in India, as it removed the threat of criminal prosecution for
consensual same-sex relationships.
§ Legal Recognition of Transgender Rights: In 2014, the Supreme Court
recognized transgender individuals as a third gender and ordered the
government to provide them with equal rights and protections. In 2019,
the government introduced the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights)
Act, which provides legal recognition to transgender individuals and
protects their rights.
§ Same-Sex Marriage: The Indian government has not yet legalized samesex marriage. However, in 2017, the Delhi High Court ruled that the right to
marry is a fundamental right and that denying same-sex couples the right
to marry is a violation of their rights. This decision was later overturned by
the Supreme Court, which held that the issue of same-sex marriage should
be left to the legislature.
§ Anti-Discrimination Laws: The Indian government has not yet passed
comprehensive anti-discrimination laws to protect LGBTQ+ individuals
from discrimination in employment, housing, and public accommodations.
However, some states, such as Tamil Nadu and Kerala, have introduced
anti-discrimination laws that include protections for LGBTQ+ individuals.
Overall, while the Indian government and judiciary have taken some steps
towards recognizing and protecting LGBTQ+ rights, there is still a long way
to go towards achieving full equality and acceptance for the community.
The legal recognition of same-sex marriage and comprehensive antidiscrimination laws are still pending, and there is a need for further
advocacy and awareness-raising efforts to ensure that the rights of the
LGBTQ+ community are fully protected.
Looking towards the future, there is hope that India will continue to make
progress towards greater LGBTQ+ rights. There have been recent positive
developments, such as the inclusion of gender identity in the country’s
census and the decision by several state governments to provide
transgender individuals with job quotas and reservation benefits. The
Indian government is also considering to legalizing same-sex marriage in
the future, particularly in light of the growing global trend towards
marriage equality. The recent legalization of same-sex marriage in
neighbouring countries like Nepal and Taiwan could put pressure on India
to follow suit.
However, it is important to note that there is still resistance to LGBTQ+
rights in India, particularly from conservative religious groups. Any
attempts to push for greater legal recognition and protection of LGBTQ+
rights could face opposition from these groups, leading to potential legal
and political battles. Overall, the future of LGBTQ+ rights in India remains
uncertain. While there are positive developments and potential for
progress, there are also challenges and obstacles that need to be
overcome. It is important for LGBTQ+ activists and supporters to continue
advocating for their rights and pushing for change, while also working to
raise awareness and promote greater acceptance and understanding in
society as a whole.
Family mediation and dispute resolution are alternative methods for resolving conflicts and
disagreements in family law matters. These methods aim to help parties reach mutually
acceptable agreements without going through the traditional court process. Here are some
common alternative dispute resolution methods used in family law:
Mediation:
Collaborative Law:
Arbitration:
Description: Mediation involves a neutral third party, known as a mediator, who assists
the parties in reaching a voluntary and mutually acceptable agreement.
Process: The mediator facilitates communication between the parties, identifies
issues, explores possible solutions, and helps the parties negotiate a resolution.
Benefits: It is often quicker and less adversarial than going to court. It allows for more
control and flexibility in crafting agreements.
Description: In collaborative law, each party is represented by their own attorney, and
all parties commit to resolving issues through negotiation without going to court.
Process: The parties and their attorneys work together in "four-way" meetings to
identify concerns, exchange information, and negotiate agreements.
Benefits: The collaborative process promotes open communication and problemsolving. It can be less confrontational than litigation.
Description: Arbitration involves a neutral third party, known as an arbitrator, who
acts as a private judge. The arbitrator's decision is typically binding on the parties.
Process: The parties present their cases, and the arbitrator makes a decision after
considering the evidence and arguments.
Benefits: Arbitration can be quicker than court proceedings, and it provides a more
private and flexible resolution process.
Negotiation:
Parenting Coordination:
Settlement Conferences:
These alternative dispute resolution methods offer families more flexibility, confidentiality,
and control over the resolution process compared to traditional litigation. Choosing the most
appropriate method depends on the nature of the dispute, the willingness of the parties to
collaborate, and the complexity of the issues involved.
Cross-Border Custody Issues:
Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction:
Jurisdictional Challenges:
Description: Negotiation is an informal process where parties and their attorneys
discuss issues and attempt to reach an agreement without involving a third-party
neutral.
Process: The parties may negotiate directly or through their attorneys, exchanging
offers and counteroffers until they reach a resolution.
Benefits: It allows for more direct communication between the parties and can be less
formal than other dispute resolution methods.
Description: Parenting coordination is often used in child custody disputes. A
parenting coordinator, who is typically a mental health or legal professional, helps
parents implement and adhere to a parenting plan.
Process: The parenting coordinator assists in resolving disputes, making
recommendations, and facilitating communication between parents.
Benefits: It can be an effective way to address ongoing conflicts related to parenting
and can provide a quicker response to day-to-day issues.
Description: A settlement conference is a meeting between the parties and their
attorneys facilitated by a neutral third party, such as a judge or mediator, to
encourage settlement.
Process: The neutral third party helps identify common ground and encourages the
parties to reach a resolution.
Benefits: It provides an opportunity for parties to resolve their differences without a
full trial.
The Hague Convention is a multilateral treaty aimed at securing the prompt return of abducted
children to their country of habitual residence.
It establishes a framework for cooperation between member countries in cases of international
child abduction.
Determining which country's courts have jurisdiction over a custody case can be complex in
international scenarios.
Jurisdiction is often based on the child's habitual residence, and conflicting jurisdictional claims
may arise.
Enforcement of Custody Orders:
Forum Shopping:
International Legal Instruments:
Best Interest of the Child Standard:
Recognition of Foreign Divorces Overview:
Principle of Comity:
Conflict of Laws:
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Judgments:
Public Policy Exception:
Divergent Legal Systems:
Once a custody order is obtained in one country, enforcing it across borders can be challenging.
Some countries may not automatically recognize or enforce custody orders from other
jurisdictions, leading to potential conflicts.
Parents may engage in forum shopping, attempting to file custody cases in jurisdictions perceived
as more favorable to their interests.
This can lead to legal battles as parties seek to establish jurisdiction in a particular country.
Some international agreements, in addition to the Hague Convention, may impact cross-border
custody disputes, such as the Brussels IIa Regulation in Europe.
Courts often apply the "best interest of the child" standard when making custody decisions in
international cases, considering factors such as stability, relationships, and the child's well-being.
Countries generally recognize divorces granted in other jurisdictions out of respect for the
principle of comity.
Comity is the legal principle that one country gives effect to the laws and judicial decisions of
another, assuming fundamental fairness.
Conflict of laws principles come into play when determining which jurisdiction's laws should apply
to a divorce case.
Courts may apply the law of the country where the marriage was solemnized, the country of the
spouses' habitual residence, or another relevant jurisdiction.
Countries may have specific procedures for recognizing and enforcing foreign divorce judgments.
Some jurisdictions may require registration or confirmation of the foreign divorce decree for it to
have legal effect.
Despite the principle of comity, countries may refuse to recognize a foreign divorce judgment if it
goes against their public policy.
Issues such as lack of due process, fraud, or violations of fundamental principles may be grounds
for non-recognition.
Differences in legal systems and cultural norms can lead to challenges in recognizing foreign
divorces.
Consultation with Legal Professionals:
It's important for individuals facing international family law issues to seek guidance from legal
professionals experienced in cross-border matters, as the resolution often involves navigating complex
legal frameworks and international treaties.
Family court procedures can vary by jurisdiction, but the following is a general overview of the typical
steps involved in family court cases, including filing procedures and court hearings:
Filing Procedures:
Initiation of the Case:
Completing the Necessary Forms:
Filing the Petition/Complaint:
Service of Process:
Response:
Temporary Orders:
Court Hearings and Proceedings:
Some legal systems may not fully align with the principles and procedures of the country where
recognition is sought.
Given the complexities of international family law, individuals involved in cross-border divorces
should seek legal advice from professionals familiar with the laws of relevant jurisdictions.
The process begins with the initiation of the case, often through the filing of a petition or
complaint. Common family law cases include divorce, child custody, child support, spousal
support, and domestic violence cases.
Parties are required to complete specific forms that vary depending on the nature of the case.
These forms typically include details about the parties, the issues at hand, and the relief
sought.
The completed forms, along with any required supporting documentation, are filed with the
family court clerk. Filing fees are typically associated with initiating a case.
Once the case is filed, the petitioner must ensure that the other party (respondent) is properly
notified of the legal action. This is known as "service of process" and may be carried out by a
process server or law enforcement.
The respondent has a specific period to file a response to the petition or complaint,
addressing the issues raised by the petitioner. Failure to respond may result in a default
judgment.
In some cases, parties may request temporary orders to address urgent matters such as child
custody, support, or spousal support while the case is pending.
Initial Appearance/Case Management Conference:
Mediation or Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR):
Discovery:
Pretrial Conferences:
Trial Preparation:
Trial:
Judgment:
Post-Judgment Motions:
It's important to note that family court procedures can vary, and specific rules and practices depend
on the jurisdiction. Parties involved in family court cases are strongly encouraged to seek legal advice
to navigate the process effectively.
The court may schedule an initial appearance or case management conference to discuss the
issues, identify contested matters, set deadlines, and establish a plan for the case.
Many jurisdictions require or encourage parties to attempt mediation or alternative dispute
resolution to resolve issues without a trial. This may occur before formal court hearings.
Discovery involves the exchange of information between the parties. This may include
requests for documents, interrogatories, and depositions to gather evidence.
Pretrial conferences may be scheduled to review the status of the case, discuss settlement
possibilities, and address any outstanding issues.
Both parties engage in trial preparation, including the preparation of witness lists, exhibits,
and legal arguments. Some cases may settle before reaching the trial stage.
If the case proceeds to trial, each party presents their case before the judge. Witnesses may
testify, and evidence is presented. The judge then makes decisions based on the law and the
facts presented.
After the trial or settlement, the court issues a judgment, outlining the decisions on issues
such as property division, custody, support, and visitation.
Parties dissatisfied with the judgment may file post-judgment motions, seeking to modify or
enforce certain aspects of the court's orders.