MUMBAI SILICON VALLEY BANGALORE SINGAPORE MUMBAI-BKC NEW DELHI MUNICH
© Copyright 2015 Nishith Desai Associates www.nishithdesai.com
Intellectual Property
Law in India
July 2015
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
About NDA
Nishith Desai Associates (NDA) is a research based international law firm with offices in Mumbai, Bangalore,
Silicon Valley, Singapore, New Delhi, Munich. We specialize in strategic legal, regulatory and tax advice coupled
with industry expertise in an integrated manner. We focus on niche areas in which we provide significant value
and are invariably involved in select highly complex, innovative transactions. Our key clients include marquee
repeat Fortune 500 clientele.
Core practice areas include International Tax, International Tax Litigation, Litigation & Dispute Resolution,
Fund Formation, Fund Investments, Capital Markets, Employment and HR, Intellectual Property, Corporate
& Securities Law, Competition Law, Mergers & Acquisitions, JVs & Restructuring, General Commercial Law
and Succession and Estate Planning. Our specialized industry niches include financial services, IT and telecom,
pharma and life sciences, education, media and entertainment, real estate and infrastructure.
Nishith Desai Associates has been ranked as the Most Innovative Indian Law Firm (2014) and the Second Most
Innovative Asia - Pacific Law Firm (2014) at the Innovative Lawyers Asia-Pacific Awards by the Financial Times
- RSG Consulting. IFLR1000 has ranked Nishith Desai Associates in Tier 1 for Private Equity (2014). Chambers
and Partners has ranked us as # 1 for Tax and Technology-Media-Telecom (2014). Legal 500 has ranked us in tier
1 for Investment Funds, Tax and Technology-Media-Telecom (TMT) practices (2011/2012/2013/2014). IBLJ (India
Business Law Journal) has awarded Nishith Desai Associates for Private equity & venture capital, Structured
finance & securitization, TMT and Taxation in 2014. IDEX Legal has recognized Nishith Desai as the Managing
Partner of the Year (2014). Legal Era, a prestigious Legal Media Group has recognized Nishith Desai Associates
as the Best Tax Law Firm of the Year (2013). Chambers & Partners has ranked us as # 1 for Tax, TMT and Private
Equity (2013). For the third consecutive year, International Financial Law Review (a Euromoney publication) has
recognized us as the Indian “Firm of the Year” (2012) for our Technology - Media - Telecom (TMT) practice. We
have been named an ASIAN-MENA COUNSEL ‘IN-HOUSE COMMUNITY FIRM OF THE YEAR’ in India for Life
Sciences practice (2012) and also for International Arbitration (2011). We have received honorable mentions in
Asian MENA Counsel Magazine for Alternative Investment Funds, Antitrust/Competition, Corporate and M&A,
TMT and being Most Responsive Domestic Firm (2012). We have been ranked as the best performing Indian
law firm of the year by the RSG India Consulting in its client satisfaction report (2011). Chambers & Partners has
ranked us # 1 for Tax, TMT and Real Estate – FDI (2011). We’ve received honorable mentions in Asian MENA
Counsel Magazine for Alternative Investment Funds, International Arbitration, Real Estate and Taxation for the
year 2010. We have been adjudged the winner of the Indian Law Firm of the Year 2010 for TMT by IFLR. We have
won the prestigious “Asian-Counsel’s Socially Responsible Deals of the Year 2009” by Pacific Business Press, in
addition to being Asian-Counsel Firm of the Year 2009 for the practice areas of Private Equity and Taxation in
India. Indian Business Law Journal listed our Tax, PE & VC and Technology-Media-Telecom (TMT) practices in
the India Law Firm Awards 2009. Legal 500 (Asia-Pacific) has also ranked us #1 in these practices for 2009-2010.
We have been ranked the highest for ‘Quality’ in the Financial Times – RSG Consulting ranking of Indian law
firms in 2009. The Tax Directors Handbook, 2009 lauded us for our constant and innovative out-of-the-box ideas.
Other past recognitions include being named the Indian Law Firm of the Year 2000 and Asian Law Firm of the
Year (Pro Bono) 2001 by the International Financial Law Review, a Euromoney publication. In an Asia survey
by International Tax Review (September 2003), we were voted as a top-ranking law firm and recognized for our
cross-border structuring work.
Our research oriented approach has also led to the team members being recognized and felicitated for thought
leadership. Consecutively for the fifth year in 2010, NDAites have won the global competition for dissertations
at the International Bar Association. Nishith Desai, Founder of Nishith Desai Associates, has been voted ‘External
Counsel of the Year 2009’ by Asian Counsel and Pacific Business Press and the ‘Most in Demand Practitioners’ by
Chambers Asia 2009. He has also been ranked No. 28 in a global Top 50 “Gold List” by Tax Business, a UK-based
journal for the international tax community. He is listed in the Lex Witness ‘Hall of fame: Top 50’ individuals
who have helped shape the legal landscape of modern India. He is also the recipient of Prof. Yunus ‘Social
Business Pioneer of India’ – 2010 award.
We believe strongly in constant knowledge expansion and have developed dynamic Knowledge Management
(‘KM’) and Continuing Education (‘CE’) programs, conducted both in-house and for select invitees. KM and
CE programs cover key events, global and national trends as they unfold and examine case studies, debate and
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
Disclaimer
Contact
This paper is a copyright of Nishith Desai Associates. No reader should act on the basis of any statement
contained herein without seeking professional advice. The authors and the firm expressly disclaim all and any
liability to any person who has read this paper, or otherwise, in respect of anything, and of consequences of
anything done, or omitted to be done by any such person in reliance upon the contents of this paper.
For any help or assistance please email us on ndaconnect@nishithdesai.com or
visit us at www.nishithdesai.com
Please see the last page of this paper for the most recent research papers by our experts.
analyze emerging legal, regulatory and tax issues, serving as an effective forum for cross pollination of ideas.
Our trust-based, non-hierarchical, democratically managed organization that leverages research and knowledge
to deliver premium services, high value, and a unique employer proposition has now been developed into
a global case study and published by John Wiley & Sons, USA in a feature titled ‘Management by Trust in a
Democratic Enterprise: A Law Firm Shapes Organizational Behavior to Create Competitive Advantage’ in the
September 2009 issue of Global Business and Organizational Excellence (GBOE).
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
1.INTRODUCTION 01
2.LEGISLATION 02
3.TRADEMARKS 03
4.DOMAIN NAMES 10
5.COPYRIGHTS 11
6.PATENTS 17
7.DESIGNS 30
8.GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF GOODS (REGISTRATION AND PROTECTION) ACT, 1999 32
9.SEMICONDUCTOR INTEGRATED CIRCUITS LAYOUT DESIGN ACT, 2000 34
10.THE PROTECTION OF PLANT AND VARIETIES AND FARMERS RIGHTS ACT, 2001 36
11.THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002 38
12.CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION & TRADE SECRETS 39
13.INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS 41
14.SPECIAL TRIBUNALS 42
15.TAX REGIME IN INDIA 43
16.ENFORCEMENT 46
17.MEASURES TO CHECK IMPORT OF INFRINGING GOODS 48
CONCLUSION 50
Content
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
1
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
1. Introduction
With the advent of the knowledge and information
technology era, intellectual capital has gained
substantial importance. Consequently, Intellectual
Property (“IP”) and rights attached thereto have
become precious commodities and are being fiercely
protected. In recent years, especially during the
last decade, the world has witnessed an increasing
number of cross-border transactions. Companies are
carrying on business in several countries and selling
their goods and services to entities in multiple
locations across the world. Since intellectual
property rights (“IPRs”) are country-specific, it is
imperative, in a global economy, to ascertain and
analyze the nature of protection afforded to IPRs
in each jurisdiction. This paper analyzes and deals
with the IP law regime in India and the protections
provided thereunder.
There are well-established statutory, administrative,
and judicial frameworks for safeguarding IPRs in
India. It becomes pertinent to mention here that
India has complied with its obligations under the
Agreement on Trade Related Intellectual Property
Rights (“TRIPS”) by enacting the necessary statutes
and amending the existing statues. Well-known
international trademarks have been afforded
protection in India in the past by the Indian courts
despite the fact that these trade marks were not
registered in India. Computer databases and software
programs have been protected under the copyright
laws in India and pursuant to this; software
companies have successfully curtailed piracy
through judicial intervention. Although trade secrets
and know-how are not protected by any specific
statutory law in India, they are protected under
the common law. The courts, under the doctrine of
breach of confidentiality, have granted protection to
trade secrets.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
2
2. Legislation
The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958
(“TM Act, 1958”) has been replaced by the Trade
Marks Act, 1999, The Copyright Act, 1957 has been
amended to protect computer programs as “literary
work”; The Patent Act, 1970 has been amended by
the Amendment Acts of 1999 and 2002 and 2005. The
Designs Act of 1911 has been completely replaced by
the Designs Act of 2000.
The following laws have been enacted to protect
newly recognized species of intellectual property in
India:
￭ The Geographical Indications of Goods
(Registration and protection) Act, 1999;
￭ The Semiconductor Integrated Circuits LayoutDesign Act, 2000;
￭ The Protection of Plants & Varieties and Farmers
Rights Act, 2001; and
￭ The Biological Diversity Act, 2002
These acts, and particularly the impact of recent
amendments to the acts, are discussed in greater
detail in the ensuing sections.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
3
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
3. Trademarks
In India, trademarks are protected both under
statutory law and common law. The Trade and
Merchandise Marks Act, 1940 (“TM Act, 1940”)
was the first law in this regard in India, which was
replaced later by the TM Act, 1958. The Trade Marks
Act, 1999 (“TM Act”) - which has replaced the TM
Act, 1958 - came into effect on September 15, 2003
and is in compliance with the TRIPS obligations.
The TM Act allows for the registration of service
marks and three-dimensional marks as well. India
follows the NICE Classification of goods and services,
which is incorporated in the Schedule to the Rules
under the TM Act.1
 A Trade Marks Registry had been
established for the purposes of the TM Act, 1940,
which has continued to function under the TM Act,
1958 and TM Act. The Trade Marks Registry is under
the charge of the Registrar of Trademarks. The head
office of the Trade Marks Registry is in Bombay
(Mumbai) and its branches are at Calcutta (Kolkata),
Delhi, Madras (Chennai), and Ahmedabad. The
territorial jurisdiction of each office has also been
allocated.
In addition to trademarks, the following categories of
marks can also be registered under the TM Act:
￭ Certification marks are given for compliance
with defined standards, but are not confined
to any membership. Such marks are granted
to anyone who can certify that the products
involved meet certain established standards.
The internationally accepted “ISO 9000” quality
standard is an example of a widely recognized
certification mark.
￭ Collective marks can be owned by any
association. The members of such associations
will be allowed to use the collective mark to
identify themselves with a level of quality and
other requirements and standards set by the
association. Examples of such associations would
be those representing accountants, engineers or
architects.
I. Unconventional Marks
India’s Trade Mark Registry has begun to recognize
“unconventional trademarks” and has extended
trademark protection to a sound mark. On August
18, 2008, India’s first “sound mark” was granted to
Sunnyvale, California-based Internet firm Yahoo
Inc.’s three-note Yahoo yodel by the Delhi branch of
the Trademark Registry. It was registered in classes
35, 38 and 42 for a series of goods including email,
advertising and business services and managing
websites.
Under the TM Act, the term ‘mark’ is defined to
include ‘a device, brand, heading, label, ticket,
name, signature, word, letter, numeral, shape of
goods, packaging or, combination of colors, or any
combination thereof.’ Thus, the list of instances of
marks is inclusive and not exhaustive. Any mark
capable of being ‘graphically represented’ and
indicative of a trade connection with the proprietor
is entitled to get registered as a trademark under
the TM Act. This interpretation opens the scope of
trademark protection to unconventional trademarks
like sound marks provided they satisfy the ‘graphical
representation’ test and are not prohibited under
Section 9 and 11 of the Act. The only way the mark
may be described in the application for trademark
is by way of “graphical representation”. However,
the TM Act or the rules framed thereunder do not
contemplate the form of submission of records of the
unconventional trademarks.
II. Scope of ‘Graphical
Representation’
Trademark Rules define “graphical representation”
as representation of a trademark for goods or
services in paper form.2
 Therefore, sound marks
can be represented on paper either in descriptive
form e.g. kukelekuuuuu (registered as Dutch sound
mark - onomatopoeia which sounds like the call of
a cock) or as traditional musical notations e.g. D#,
E etc. Other alternative methods for their visual
representation have also emerged like depictions by
oscillogram; spectrum, spectrogram and sonogram
are now being accepted in other jurisdictions.
However, such representations must be handled
carefully in order to meet the requirements of
trademark offices in India. In the case of Yahoo’s
Yodel mark, they represented the mark using
musical notations.
1. Classes of Goods and Services: Classes 1 to 34 covers goods while classes 35 to 45 cover services.
2. See Rule 2 (k), The Trademark Rules, 2002.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
4
III.Syncing the Indian Law to
Tide over the Hurdles of
Registration
Reducing a sensory mark to a written description
on paper may not be always possible. A “graphical
description” of a sound mark should clearly identify
the exact sound, else the enforcement of the same,
would lead to practical issues. E.g. the search result
of the trademark at Trade Mark Registry would
not be accurate if the mark is not appropriately
described. Merely musical notes without a listing of
the note pattern would not provide enough sensory
information to contemplate the scope of protection
on the mark. Musical notations alone are neither a
clear nor precise description of the sound mark and
gives no information about the pitch and duration
of the sounds forming the melody. The graphical
representations should be clear, precise, selfcontained, easily accessible, intelligible, durable and
objective. A stave divided into bars and showing, in
particular, a clef, musical notes and rests whose form
indicates the relative value and, where appropriate,
accidentals (sharp, flat, natural) - all of these
determine the pitch and duration of the sounds.
This may constitute a faithful representation of the
sequence of sounds forming the melody in respect of
which registration is sought.3
With regard to onomatopoeias, there is lack of
consistency between the onomatopoeia itself, as
pronounced, and the actual sound or noise which it
purports to imitate phonetically. Practical difficulties
are bound to arise when trademark searches will be
required. For e.g. if the sound mark is a crow’s call
and is described as kukelekuuuuu, the same may
be spelt differently or represented with musical
notations. The procedure may be highly complicated
as musical notations need to be matched against
alphabets. To simplify matters, a sample of the sound
may be submitted with the application. A separate
database of these sound marks can be created and
rules for determination of deceptive similarity
between sound marks should be developed.
Indian Trade Mark Registry may have enhanced the
scope of protection under the trademark umbrella,
but there need to be clear guidelines for description,
recording and protection that will help define the
boundaries of protection of unconventional marks.
IV. Who can Apply?
Any person claiming to be the proprietor of a
trademark used or proposed to be used by that
person can file an application for registration.
The application may be made in the name of
the individual, partner of a firm, a company, any
government department, a trust, or even in name
of joint applicants. Domestic and international
applicants are treated at par. An application can also
be filed on behalf of a company that is about to be
incorporated or registered under the Companies Act,
1956.4
V. Is Prior use Required?
Prior use of the trademark is not a prerequisite
for filing application or its registration and an
application may be made for registration even if
the intention of the applicants is bona fide use of
the trademark in the future. In such a case, the
application can be filed on a “proposed to be used
basis”. However, in the case of descriptive marks,
the Trade Marks Registry usually insists upon proof
of use of the mark and the distinctiveness acquired
through such use before granting a registration.
VI. Is a Prior Search Necessary?
Though a prior search for a conflicting trademark
is not a prerequisite for filing an application, it is
advisable to carry out a search and maintain the
search results. In opposition proceedings or in
infringement / passing off actions, such search
reports act as proof of honesty and good faith in the
adoption of the marks.
In a move to curb the spread and sale of counterfeit
drugs, the Drugs Control Department of the National
Territory of Delhi has made search reports from
the Registrar of Trade Marks mandatory before
approving any drug-manufacturing license under a
particular brand name.
3. Shield Mark BV v. Joost Kist h.o.d.n. Memex, (1999) RPC 392.
4. Section 46 of the TM Act.
Trademarks
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
5
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
This initiative by the Delhi Drugs Authority is
in pursuance of the Indian Supreme Court’s (SC)
observations in the case of Cadila Health Care Ltd.
v. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (decided on March
26, 2001).5
 If adopted in the other states in India, this
provision will eliminate the chances of approval
of a deceptively similar and look-alike brand of the
existing products.
VII. What is the Process of
Registration?
The application for trademark registration must
contain a clear reproduction of the sign, including
any colors, forms, or three-dimensional features.
These forms need to be filed with the appropriate
office of the Trade Marks Registry. The sign must
fulfill certain conditions in order to be protected
as a trademark – or as another type of mark – and
must indicate the class of goods / services to which
it would apply. The TM Act has laid down absolute6
and relative grounds of refusal7
 of trademark
registration. These grounds are akin to the provisions
of the UK Trademark Act of 1994.
The process of registration of trademarks under the
TM Act can be explained utilizing the diagram on
the following page:
5. (2001) SCL 534. In paragraph 41 of the judgment, the Supreme Court observed:
“Keeping in view the provisions of Section 17-B of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 which, inter alia, indicates an imitation or resemblance of
another drug in a manner likely to deceive being regarded as a spurious drug it is but proper that before granting permission to manufacture a drug
under a brand name the authority under that Act is satisfied that there will be no confusion or deception in the market. The authorities should
consider requiring such an applicant to submit an official search report from the Trade Mark office pertaining to the trade mark in question which
will enable the drug authority to arrive at a correct conclusion.”
6. Section 9 of the TM Act.
7. Section 11 of the TM Act.
Mark should be distinctive and should not be in the prohibited category.
Carry out a search at the Trade Marks Registry, to find out if same or similar marks are
either registered or pending registration. This is advisable although not compulsory.
Under the Trade Marks Act, a single application with respect to multiple classes can be
filed.
The application is dated and numbered, and a copy is returned to the applicant /
attorney. Once the mark is registered, this number is deemed to be the Registration
Number.
The Trade Marks Registry sends the “Official Examination Report” asking for
clarificatioans, if any, and also cites identical or deceptively similar marks already
registered or pending registration. The applicant has to overcome the objections.
SELECTION OF THE
MARK
SEARCH BEFORE
APPLICATION
FILING OF THE
APPLICATION
NUMBERING OF THE
APPLICATION
MEETING THE OFFICIAL
OBJECTIONS
The application is thereafter published in the “Trade Marks Journal,” which is a
Government of India publication, published by the Trade Marks Registry.
ADVERTISING OF THE
APPLICATION
After publication, if the application is not opposed within the specified opposition
period (four months), then the registration is granted. On the other hand, if it is
opposed by a third party, the registration is granted only if the matter is decided in
favor of the applicant.
ACCEPTANCE OF THE
APPLICATION
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
6
8. Rule 38 of the Trade Marks Rules, 2002.
9. Section 47(1) (a) of the TM Act.
10. Section 47(1) (b) of the TM Act.
11. Section 57 of the TM Act.
12. Sections 37 to 45 of the TM Act deal with the provisions of the assignment and transmission of the trade mark.
After the objections are successfully met and answers are provided to the queries,
the Trade Marks Registry issues an official letter intimating their acceptance of the
application.
Registration of a trademark normally takes four to five years. However, when the
registration certificate is issued, it is always effective from the date on which the
application is filed.
OPPOSITION
PROCEEDINGS
ISSUE OF CERTIFICATE
OF REGISTRATION
VIII.Can the Registration Process
be Expedited?
After receipt of the official number of an application,
the applicant may request an expedited examination
of a registration application, together with a
declaration stating the reason for the request and
a payment of five times the application fee. If the
Registrar of Trademarks is satisfied with the reason,
the examination of the application is expedited
and the examination report is issued within three
months of the date of such request. If such a request
is rejected after the hearing, the fee paid is refunded.8
IX.What is the Term of
Registration?
The registration is valid for ten years and is
renewable for a subsequent period of ten years. Nonrenewal leads to a lapse of registration. However,
there is a procedure whereby a lapsed registration
can be restored.
X.How can the Registration of a
Trademark be Cancelled?
An application for cancellation or rectification of
registration of a trademark can only be filed by the
aggrieved person (e.g. prior users of the mark). Such
an application must be filed with the Registrar of
Trade Marks or the Appellate Board.
XI.Grounds for Cancellation /
Revocation
The following are some of the grounds on which
the registration of a trademark can be removed or
cancelled:
￭ The trademark was registered without any bona
fide intention on the part of the applicant to
use the trademark and there has been no bona
fide use of the trademark for the time being up
to a date three months before the date of the
application for removal;9
 or
￭ That up to a date three months before the date of
application for removal, a continuous period of
five years from the date on which the trademark
is actually entered on the register or longer
has elapsed during which the trademark was
registered and during which there was no bona
fide use thereof;10 or
￭ The trademark was registered without sufficient
cause, or the trademark is wrongly remaining on
the Register.11
XII. Assignment of Trademarks12
A registered trademark can be assigned or
transmitted with or without the goodwill of the
business concerned, and in respect of either or all
of the goods or services in respect of which the
trademark is registered. An unregistered trademark
can be assigned or transmitted with or without
the goodwill of the business concerned. However,
in respect of assignment of trademarks (registered
or unregistered) without goodwill of the business
concerned, the prescribed procedure has to be
Trademarks
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
7
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
followed, which inter alia, includes advertisement
of the proposed assignment to be published in the
newspapers. The Registrar of Trade Marks could
impose certain restrictions and conditions for the
assignment or transmission of the trademark. To be
effective, the assignment or transmission must be
recorded with the Registrar of Trade Marks.
XIII. License of Trademarks
The TM Act provides for a registration procedure
of registered / licensed users of the registered
trademark. The benefit of use by the registered /
license user accrues to the benefit of the mark’s
proprietor.13 The TM Act recognizes non-registered
licensed use if only such use is with the consent of
the proprietor as embodied in a written agreement
and if such user satisfies the prescribed conditions.14
Owners of Indian registered trademarks, who are
located abroad, having no presence in India, can use
their trademarks in India by granting licenses to the
Indian parties.
XIV.Rights Conferred by
Registration15
The registration of a trademark gives the registered
proprietor the exclusive right to use the trademark
in relation to the goods or services for which it
is registered and to obtain relief with respect to
infringement of the same. Registration acts as a
public notice to others, informing them that they
should not use the trademarks which are registered
or pending for registration.
XV. Paris Convention
Reciprocity for the purpose of claiming priority is
allowed from the applications originating from the
Paris Convention countries if filed within 6 months
from the date of priority.
XVI. Infringement of Trademark
Registration of a trademark is a prerequisite for
initiating an infringement action. The following
essential conditions must exist for initiation of an
infringement action:16
￭ The allegedly infringing mark must be either
identical or deceptively similar to the registered
trademark;
￭ The goods / services in relation to which the
allegedly infringing mark is used must be
specifically covered by the registration of the
registered trademark;
￭ The use of the allegedly infringing mark must be
in the course of trade; and
￭ The use must be in such a manner as to render
the use likely to be taken as being used as a
trademark.
A registered trademark is also infringed by use of a
mark when because of:
￭ Its identity with registered trademark and
similarity with goods / services covered by
registration; or
￭ Its similarity with registered trademark and
identity with goods / services covered by
registration; or
￭ Its identity with registered trademark and
identity with goods / services covered by
registration
Is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public
(in case 3 above, confusion is presumed), or which
is likely to have an association with the registered
trademark.17
If an identical or similar mark is used with respect to
goods or services which are not similar to those for
which a registered trademark is registered, such use
amounts to infringement if a registered trademark
has reputation in India and the use of the mark
without due cause takes unfair advantage of or is
detrimental to the distinctive character or repute of
the registered trademark.18
13. Section 48(2) of the TM Act.
14. Section 2(1) (r) read with Section 48(2) of the TM Act.
15. Section 28 of the TM Act.
16. Section 29(1) of the TM Act.
17. Sections 29(2) and (3) of the TM Act.
18. Section 29(4) of the TM Act.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
8
Under the TM Act, the following acts would also
amount to an infringement of the RTM:
￭ Use of the registered trademark as a trade name
or part of the trade name dealing in same goods
or services for which the registered trademark is
registered;19 or
￭ Use of the trademark in advertising if such
advertising takes unfair advantage of and is
contrary to the honest practice in industrial
or commercial matters, or is detrimental to its
distinctive character; or against the reputation of
the trademark.20
￭ Under the TM Act, even oral use of the mark can
constitute infringement.21
XVII.Who can sue for
Infringement?
The registered proprietor, his heirs and the registered
user(s) can sue for infringement. An assignee of a
registered trademark can also sue for infringement.
A passing off suit can be converted into a combined
action of infringement and passing off, if the
registration of the trademark is obtained before the
final hearing of the passing off suit.
XVIII. Passing Off
The user of an unregistered trademark is barred
from instituting an infringement action. However,
if the mark in question has become well known in
India, the user of such a trademark is not without
recourse and may seek a remedy by means of a
passing off action. The purpose of this tort is to
protect commercial goodwill and to ensure that
one’s business reputation is not exploited. Since
business goodwill is an asset and therefore a species
of property, the law protects it against encroachment
as such. In a passing off action, the plaintiff must
establish that the mark, name or get-up - the use of
which by the defendant is subject of the action - is
distinctive of his goods in the eyes of the public or
class of public and that his goods are identified in the
market by a particular mark or symbol.
XIX.Recognition of Foreign WellKnown Marks & Trans-border
Reputation
The courts in India have recognized the trans-border
reputation of foreign trademarks and trade names
and the importance of their protection.
The ruling of the Supreme Court of India in N.
R. Dongre and Others v. Whirlpool Corporation
and Another22 was perhaps the first Indian case to
recognize the concept of trans-border reputation of
trademarks. The subject matter of this case was the
manufacture, sale of washing machines by an Indian
company using the trademark “Whirlpool” as part
of the name by which it had recently commenced
marketing its washing machines. The appellant
had also advertised the washing machines as
such. The claim of the respondent, the Whirlpool
Corporation and its Indian joint venture TVSWhirlpool Limited was based on prior user of the
mark “Whirlpool” and the fact that the trademark
had a trans-border reputation. They contended that
any goods marketed with the mark “Whirlpool” gave
the impression of being goods manufactured by the
respondents. The washing machines manufactured,
sold, and advertised by the appellant gave that
impression and this resulted in confusion arising
in the market. The Whirlpool Corporation sought
a temporary injunction against the appellant’s use
of the mark, which was granted by the Delhi High
Court and upheld by the Supreme Court of India.
This judgment has been relied upon successfully
in a number of decisions passed by Indian courts
down the years. International trademarks, having
no actual presence in India could, as a result, be
enforced in India if a trans-border reputation with
respect to such trademarks can be shown to exist.
Subsequently, marks such as Volvo, Caterpillar,
and Ocuflox, have received protection of their
trademarks via judicial decisions.
XX. Orders in Infringement and
Passing off Suits
In an action for infringement of a registered
trademark, or in an action for passing off for either a
19. Section 29(5) of the TM Act.
20. Section 29(8) of the TM Act.
21. Section 29(9) of the TM Act.
22. (1996) 5 SCC 714.
Trademarks
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
9
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
registered or unregistered mark, the court may order
an injunction.23 The court may also award damages
or an order for account of profits along with the
delivery of the infringing marks, for destruction or
erasure. In addition to the civil remedies, the TM Act
contains stringent criminal provisions relating to
offenses and penalties.
23. Section 135 of the TM Act provides for identical reliefs for infringement and passing off.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
10
4. Domain Names
Indian courts have been proactive in granting orders
against the use of infringing domain names. Some
of the cases in which injunctions against the use
of conflicting domain names have been granted
are: www.sifynet.com v. www.siffynet.com24 www.
yahoo.com v. www.yahooindia.com25 and www.
rediff.com v. www.radiff.com.
26 In the www.yahoo.
com case it has been held that “the domain name
serves the same function as a trade mark, and is not a
mere address or like finding number on the internet,
and therefore, it is entitled to equal protection as a
trademark”.
24. Satyam Infoway Ltd. v. Sifynet Solutions Pvt. Ltd. AIR 2004 SC 3540.
25. Yahoo India v. Akash Arora (1999) PTC 201 (Del).
26. Rediff Communications Limited v. Cyberbooth AIR 2000 Bom 27.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
11
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
5. Copyrights
The Copyright Act, 1957 (“Copyright Act”),
supported by the Copyright Rules, 1958 (“Copyright
Rules”), is the governing law for copyright protection
in India. Substantial amendments were carried out
to the Copyright Act, in early 2012 (“Amendment”).
Some of the salient amendments have been discussed
in this section.
The Copyright Act provides that a copyright
subsists in an original literary, dramatic, musical
or artistic work, cinematograph films, and sound
recordings.27 However, no copyright subsists in a
cinematograph film if a substantial part of the film
is an infringement of the copyright in any other
work or in a sound recording, if in making the sound
recording of a literary, dramatic or musical work,
copyright in such work is infringed.28 A computer
programme is treated as a “literary work” and is
protected as such.
I. Is Copyright Registration
Compulsory?
Under Indian law, registration is not a prerequisite
for acquiring a copyright in a work. A copyright
in a work is created when the work is created and
given a material form, provided it is original. The
Copyright Act provides for a copyright registration
procedure. However, unlike the U.S. law, the Indian
law registration does not confer any special rights or
privileges with respect to the registered copyrighted
work. The Register of Copyright acts as prima facie
evidence of the particulars entered therein. The
documents purporting to be copies of the entries
and extracts from the Register certified by the
Registrar of Copyright are admissible in evidence in
all courts without further proof of original.29 Thus,
registration only raises a presumption that the
person in the Register is the actual author, owner
or right holder. The presumption is not conclusive.
But where contrary evidence is not forthcoming,
it is not necessary to render further proof to show
that the copyright vests in the person mentioned
in the Register. In infringement suits and criminal
proceedings, when time is of essence to obtain urgent
orders, registration is of tremendous help. Copyright
notice is not necessary under the Indian law to claim
protection
II. Berne Convention and
Universal Copyright
Convention
India is a member of the above conventions. The
Government of India has passed the International
Copyright Order, 1958. According to this Order,
any work first published in any country - which is a
member of any of the above conventions - is granted
the same treatment as if it was first published in
India.
III.What Rights does Copyright
Provide?
A copyright grants protection to the creator and
his representatives for the works and prevents such
works from being copied or reproduced without his/
their consent. The creator of a work can prohibit or
authorize anyone to:
￭ reproduce the work in any form, such as print,
sound ,video, etc;
￭ use the work for a public performance, such as a
play or a musical work;
￭ make copies/recordings of the work, such as via
compact discs, cassettes, etc.;
￭ broadcast it in various forms; or
￭ translate the same to other languages
IV. What is the term of Copyright?
The term of copyright is, in most cases, the lifetime
of the author plus 60 years thereafter.
27. Section 13 of the Copyright Act.
28. Ibid.
29. Section 48 of the Copyright Act.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
12
V. First Ownership of Copyright &
‘Work for Hire’
The author of a work is usually the ‘first owner’ of
such work. In certain circumstances, Section 17 of
the Copyright Act determines who may be regarded
as the ‘first owner’ of a copyrighted work. The
concept of ‘first owner’ under Indian copyright law is
quite important and may be determined as follows:
￭ In the case of a literary, dramatic or artistic
work (which includes a photograph, painting
or a portrait) created during the course of
employment or, under a contract of service or
apprenticeship, for the purpose of publication
in a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical,
the proprietor of such a publication shall, in the
absence of a contract to the contrary, be the first
owner of copyright. However, such ownership
shall vest with the proprietor of the publication
only for the limited purpose of publishing
the work or a reproduction of the work in a
publication and, for all other purposes, the
copyright shall vest with the author of the work.
￭ If a photograph, painting or portrait has not
been made for the purposes of publication in
a periodical but has been made for any other
purpose, then in the absence of a contract to the
contrary, the copyright in such work shall vest
with the person at whose instance the work was
created.30
￭ In the case of a cinematograph film, in the
absence of a contract to the contrary, the
copyright in the cinematograph film shall vest
with the producer of the film i.e. the person at
whose instance the film was made for a valuable
consideration.31
￭ In case of a work made during the course of
employment or under a contract of service or
apprenticeship, (to which the instances given
under serial no. 1 do not apply), the employer
shall, in the absence of a contract to the contrary
shall be the first owner of copyright.32
￭ In case of a government work, in the absence of
a contract to the contrary, the copyright in the
work shall vest with the government.33
The concept of ‘Work for Hire’ though not expressly
covered under the Copyright Act, it is implied under
Section 17 whereby, the copyright in any work
created on commissioned basis, shall vest with
the person creating such work. In order to vest the
copyright with the person commissioning the work,
an assignment in writing shall be necessary.
VI.Special Monetary Rights
in Underlying Works in a
Cinematograph Film / Sound
Recordings.
￭ The Amendment has introduced significant
monetary rights for authors of literary,
musical works etc. that are incorporated in
cinematograph films and sound recordings.
Authors of literary or musical works (i)
incorporated in films; or (ii) sound recordings
(which are not part of films) have the right to
receive royalties equal to the royalties received
by the assignee of such rights for exploitation of
their works (other than communication to public
of that film in cinema halls). These rights cannot
be assigned or waived by the right holders (except
in favor of legal heirs and copyright societies).
Any agreement that seeks to assign or waive the
above rights shall be void. While the language in
the amendment is not very clear from the debates
surrounding the Amendment, it seems that
scriptwriters/screenplay writers are intended to
be covered within the scope of these provisions.
￭ Further, no assignment of the copyright in any
work to make a cinematograph film or sound
recording can affect the right of the author
of the work to claim royalties or any other
consideration payable in case of utilization of
the work in any form other than as part of the
cinematograph film or sound recording.
￭ The business of issuing or granting license in
respect of literary, dramatic, musical and artistic
works incorporated in a cinematographic film
or sound recordings post the amendment can be
carried out only through a copyright society duly
registered under the Act.
VII. Assignment of Copyright
As mandated by Section 19, no assignment of
copyright shall be valid unless such assignment is in
30. Proviso (a) and (b) to Section 17 of the Copyright Act.
31. Proviso (b) to Section 17 of the Copyright Act.
32. Proviso (c) to Section 17 of the Copyright Act.
33. Proviso (d) to Section 17 of the Copyright Act.
Copyrights
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
13
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
writing and signed by the assignee and the assignee.
Such assignment ought to identify:
￭ the work and the rights assigned,
￭ the territorial extent and,
￭ the duration of the assignment
Where, the territorial extent and the duration of the
assignment has not been specified, it shall be deemed
that the assignment extends to the territory of India
and the duration of assignment is for a period of five
years respectively.
Under Section 18 of the Copyright Act, even
the copyright in a future work can be assigned
in accordance with Section 19, however, such
assignment shall come into effect only upon date of
creation of the work. It has now been added by the
Amendment that no assignment shall be applied to
any medium or mode of exploitation of the work,
which did not exist or was not in commercial use at
the time when the assignment was made, unless the
assignment specifically referred to such medium or
mode of exploitation of the work.
VIII. Moral Rights
Section 57 of the Copyright Act grants an author
“special rights,” which exist independently of the
author’s copyright, and subsists even after the
assignment (whole or partial) of the said copyright.
The author has the right to (a) claim authorship of the
work; and (b) restrain or claim damages with respect
to any distortion, mutilation, modification, or other
act in relation to the said work if such distortion,
mutilation, modification, or other act would be
prejudicial to his honor or repute.These special
rights can be exercised by the legal representatives
of the author. Before the Amendment the right to
claim authorship could not be exercised by legal
representatives of the author. Now, post death of
the author, if he is not given credit for his work,
then even legal representatives, may be able to take
necessary action to remedy such breach. As per the
Amendment, the right against distortion is available
even after the expiry of the term of copyright. Earlier,
it was available only against distortion, mutilation
etc. done during the term of copyright of the work.
IX. Rights Related to Copyright
A field of rights related to copyright has rapidly
developed over the last 50 years. These related rights
have developed around copyrighted works and
provide similar, though more limited protection.
Such rights are:
A. Performers’ Right
When any performer (e.g., an actor or a musician)
appears or engages in any performance, he has
this special right in relation to his performance.
The Amendment has modified the definition
of “Performer” by clarifying that that in a
cinematograph film a person whose performance
is casual or incidental in nature and is not
acknowledged in the credits of the film shall not
be treated as a performer except for the purpose of
attributing moral rights. The term of this right is
50 years from the beginning of the calendar year
following the year of performance.34 The “Performer’s
Right” is stated to be the exclusive right subject to the
provisions of the Act, to do or authorize for doing any
of the following acts in respect of the performance or
any substantial part thereof, namely:
i. to make a sound recording or a visual recording
of the performance, including—
a. reproduction of it in any material form
including the storing of it in any medium by
electronic or any other means;
b. issuance of copies of it to the public not being
copies already in circulation;
c. communication of it to the public;
d. selling or giving it on commercial rental or
offer for sale or for commercial rental any
copy of the recording;
ii. to broadcast or communicate the performance
to the public except where the performance
is already broadcast. Once a performer
has by written agreement consented to
the incorporation of his performance in a
cinematograph film he shall not in the absence
of any contract to the contrary object to the
enjoyment by the producer of the film of the
performers rights in the same film. However, the
performer shall be entitled for royalties in case of
making of the performances for commercial use.
34. Section 38 of the Copyright Act.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
14
B. Broadcast Reproduction Right
Every broadcasting organization has this right with
respect to its broadcasts. The term of this right is
25 years from the beginning of the calendar year
following the year in which the broadcast is made.35
X. Infringement of a Copyright
A copyright is infringed if a person without an
appropriate license does anything that the owner
of the copyright has an exclusive right to do.36
However, there are certain exceptions37 to the above
rule (e.g., fair dealing). The Copyright Act provides
for both civil and criminal remedies for copyright
infringement. When an infringement is proved,
the copyright owner is entitled to remedies by way
of injunction, damages, and order for seizure and
destruction of infringing articles.
XI.Importation of Infringing
Copies
The Amendment has introduced a revised Section
53, which provides a detailed procedure where the
owner of the copyright can make an application
to the Commissioner of Customs (or any other
authorised officer) for seizing of infringing copies of
works that are imported into India.
XII.Copyright Protection of
Software
By the 1994 amendment of the Copyright Act, an
inclusive definition of the term “Literary Work”
was inserted to read as: “Literary Work includes
computer38 programmes39 , tables and compilations
including computer databases”.40 The terms tables,
compilations, and computer database have not been
defined in the Copyright Act.
XIII. Rights Conferred
The owner of a computer programme (“CP”) has the
exclusive right to do or authorize third parties to do
the following acts: reproduction of the CP, issuing
copies to public, perform / communicate it to public,
to make translation or adaptation41 of the work, to
sell or give on commercial rental or offer for sale or
for commercial rental any copy of the CP. However,
the commercial rental provision does not apply if
the CP itself is not an essential part of the rental. Any
violation of these exclusive rights amounts to an
infringement.
XIV. Infringement – Defenses
Section 52 of the Copyright Act enlists the acts that
do not constitute copyright infringement. If the
lawful possessor of the CP makes copies or adaptation
of the CP in the following circumstances, they do
not constitute infringement: (1) for utilizing the CP
for the purpose for which it was supplied; or (2) to
make backup copies purely as a temporary protection
against loss, destruction or damage. Further, to obtain
information essential for operating inter-operability
of an independently created the CP with other the CP,
the lawful possessor can do any act, provided such
information is not readily available. Observation,
study or test of functioning of the CP to determine
the ideas and principles that underline any elements
of the CP (while performing such acts necessary
for the function for which the CP is supplied), does
not amount to infringement. Making of copies
or adaptation of the CP from a personally legally
obtained copy for non-commercial personal use is
also allowed. The fair dealing defense is not available
in the case of a CP.
XV. Registration
For registration of CP, a practice has developed
wherein the first 25 and last 25 pages of the source
code are deposited with the Registrar of Copyright.
There is no specific provision for the deposit of
35. Section 37 of the Copyright Act.
36. Section 51 of the Copyright Act.
37. Section 52 of the Copyright Act.
38. Per Section 2 (ffb) of the Copyright Act: “Computer includes any electronic or similar device having information processing capabilities.”
39. Per Section 2 (ffc) of the Copyright Act: “Computer Programme means a set of instructions expressed in words, codes, schemes or in any other form,
including a machine readable medium, capable of causing computer to perform a particular task or achieve a particular result.”
40. Section 2(o) of the Copyright Act.
41. Any use of work involving rearrangement or alteration.
Copyrights
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
15
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
the source code on any specified media. In any
event, such deposit is not advisable. Since the only
advantage of registration is that it acts as prima
facie proof, other means could be adopted to prove
date of creation, ownership of copyright, and other
details with respect to the same (e.g., deposit of the
CP in a safe deposit locker, posting of the CP to a
lawyer or one’s own address). Further, maintenance
of logbooks recording the details of the development
of CP could also act as proof of date of creation and
ownership.
XVI. Offences
Knowingly making use on a computer of an
infringing copy of CP is a punishable offence.42
The penalty for such an offence is imprisonment
(minimum of seven days and maximum of three
years) and a fine (minimum INR43 50,000 and
maximum INR 2,00,000). If the offender proves that
such use was not for gain in the course of trade or
business, the court may waive imprisonment and
grant a fine up to INR 50,000.
XVII. Copyright Societies
The primary function of a copyright society (also
generally referred to as ‘collecting society’) is to
administer the rights on behalf of its members and
grant licenses for the commercial exploitation of
these rights. Such a society collect the license fee
or the royalty on behalf of its members, which
is then conveyed to the members after making
deductions for the expenses borne for collection and
distribution.
At present, in accordance with section 33 of the
Copyright Act, the following are registered as
copyright societies:
￭ Indian Performing Rights Society or IPRS, which
administers the rights relating to musical and
lyrical works on behalf of its members which
primarily include authors, composers and the
publishers of musical and lyrical works.
￭ Phonographic Performance Limited or PPL
administers the commercial exploitation of
phonograms or sound recordings on behalf of its
members.
￭ Society for Copyright Regulation of Indian
Producers for Film and Television or SCRIPT,
which acts on behalf of the producers or the
copyright owners of cinematograph and
television films to protect their copyright therein.
￭ Indian Reprographic Rights Organization or
IRRO, which administers the rights relating to
reprographic (photocopying) works on behalf
of its members who are essentially authors
and publishers of printed works such as books,
newspapers, magazines, journals, periodicals, etc.
The Amendment has brought in significant changes
to the provisions dealing with Copyright Societies.
The Amendment permits authors of the work to
be members of the Copyright Societies as opposed
to only owners of works. Copyright Societies are
required to have governing bodies consisting of
equal number of authors and owners of work for
the purpose of administration of the society. All
members of the Copyright Society shall enjoy
equal membership rights and there shall be no
discrimination between authors and owners in
the distribution of royalties. The Amendment also
envisages the Copyright Societies registered under
the Act to administer the rights of the performers
and broadcasters. The provisions applicable to the
authors’ societies including the new tariff related
provision specified below are applicable in relation
to such societies.
The Amendment has also inserted a new Section 33A
providing for the following:
￭ Every copyright society is required to publish its
Tariff Scheme in a prescribed manner;
￭ Any person who is aggrieved by the tariff scheme
may appeal to the Copyright Board and the Board
may, if satisfied after holding such inquiry as it
may consider necessary, make such orders as may
be required to remove any unreasonable element,
anomaly or inconsistency therein;
￭ However, the aggrieved person is required to
pay to the copyright society any fee as may be
prescribed that has fallen due before making an
appeal to the Copyright Board and shall continue
to pay such fee until the appeal is decided. The
Board has no authority to issue any order staying
the collection of such fee pending disposal of the
appeal:
￭ The Copyright Board may after hearing
the parties fix an interim tariff and direct
the aggrieved parties to make the payment
accordingly pending disposal of the appeal.
42. Section 63B of the Copyright Act.
43. Indian Rupees.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
16
XVIII. Compulsory Licenses and
Statutory Licenses
A compulsory license (CL) is an involuntary license
issued for a copyrighted piece of work that the
copyright owner has to grant for the use of their
rights in the work against payment as established
under law in case the Copyright Board concludes
that the copyrighted piece of work is withheld from
the public. Under the Act, the CL provisions under
Section 31 (in relation to published work) and 31A
(in relation to unpublished or anonymous work)
were earlier restricted only to Indian works. The
Amendment seeks to remove this limitation. The
provisions have now been made applicable to all
works. A new provision has been inserted where the
work may be made available under CL for the benefit
of people suffering from disabilities.
The Amendment has introduced the concept of
“statutory license” in relation to published works.
Any broadcasting organization, that proposes to
communicate the a published work to the public
by way of broadcast (including television and radio)
or a performance of any published musical/ lyrical
work and sound recording, may do so by giving
prior notice of its intention to the owners of the
rights. Such prior notice has to state the duration
and territorial coverage of the broadcast and pay
royalties for each work at the rate and manner fixed
by the Copyright Board. The rates fixed for television
broadcasting shall be different than that fixed for
radio broadcasting. In fixing the manner and the
rate of royalty, the Copyright Board may require the
broadcasting organization to pay an advance to the
owners of rights. No fresh alteration to any literary or
musical work, which is not technically necessary for
the purpose of broadcasting, other than shortening
the work for convenience of broadcast, shall be made
without the consent of the owners of rights. The
names of the author and the principal performer
will have to be announced with the broadcast
(unless communicated by way of the performance
itself). Records and books of accounts will have to be
maintained by the Broadcasting Organizations and
reports will be required to be given to the owners of
the rights. The owners are also granted audit rights
against the broadcasting organizations.
XIX. Statutory License for Cover
Versions
The Act pursuant to the Amendment provides for
the grant of statutory licenses for making “cover
versions”. Cover version may be made only of such
literary, dramatic or musical work, in relation to
which a sound recording has already been made by
or with the license or consent of the owner of the
right in the work. Cover version can be made only
after the expiration of five calendar years, after the
end of the year in which the first sound recordings
of the original work was made. Cover version shall
not contain any alteration in the literary or musical
work, which has not been made previously by or
with the consent of the owner of rights, or which is
not technically necessary for the purpose of making
the sound recordings. Cover version shall not be sold
or issued in any form of packaging or with any cover
or label which is likely to mislead or confuse the
public as to their identity, and in particular shall not
contain the name or depict in any way any performer
of an earlier sound recording of the same work or any
cinematograph film in which such sound recording
was incorporated. Cover version should state on the
cover that it is a cover version made under Section
31C of Act.
Copyrights
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
17
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
6. Patents
In India, the law governing patents is the Patents
Act, 1970 (“Patents Act”). In India’s continued
efforts to comply with it’s commitment under
TRIPS the Patents Act has been amended thrice
since 1995, by the Patents (Amendment) Act, 1999
(“First Amendment”), the Patents (Amendment)
Act, 2002 (“Second Amendment”) and Patents
(Amendment) Act, 2005 (“Third Amendment”), Prior
to the Third Amendment, the President of India had
promulgated Patents (Amendment) Ordinance, 2004
(“Ordinance”), which was later replaced by the Third
Amendment.44 The legislation is supported by the
Patents Rule, 2003 (“Rules”). The following outlines
the current Indian patent law framework.
Not all innovations are “inventions” within the
definition of the Patents Act.The term “invention”
is defined under Section 2(1) (j) of the Patents Act
as “a new product or process involving an inventive
step45 and capable of industrial application.”46 Thus,
the traditional aspects of novelty, non-obviousness,
and utility have been specifically included in the
definition of the term “invention”.
I. Novelty
If the invention was known or used by any other
person, or used or sold by the applicant to any person
in India and/or outside India, then the applicant
would not be entitled to the grant of a patent. Public
use or publication of the invention will affect
the validity of an application in India. The patent
application must be filed prior to any publication
or public use. However, there is a 12-month grace
period permitted in India when a person has made
an application for a patent in a convention country
and if that person or his legal representative (or his
assignee) makes an application with respect to the
same invention in India. Although patent rights
are essentially territorial in nature, the criteria of
novelty and non-obviousness are to be considered
on / compared with prior arts on a worldwide basis.
Any earlier patent, earlier publication, document
published in any country, earlier product disclosing
the same invention, or earlier disclosure or use by
the inventor will prevent the granting of a patent in
India.
Inventions That are Not “Inventions”
Section 3 of the Patents Act enlists the innovations
that are not classified as “inventions” within the
meaning of the Act. These may fall within the
definition of the expression “invention,” but the
Patents Act expressly excludes them from the
definition. Innovations that are not inventions
within the meaning of the Patents Act, and
accordingly are not patentable in India, include: (i) a
method of agriculture or horticulture; (ii) a process
for the medicinal or other treatment of human
beings and animals; (iii) a mere discovery of any new
property, or new use for a known substance, or a
44. Don’t take this for granted <eco-times/2005/Don%27t-take-this-for-granted-VV-GG(Apr10,05).pdf>, April 10, 2005.
45. Section 2(1) (ja) of the Patents Act: “inventive step means a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as compared to the existing
knowledge or having economic significance or both and that makes the invention not obvious to a person skilled in the art.”
46. Section 2(1) (ac) of the Patents Act: “capable of industrial application in relation to an invention means that the invention is capable of being made or
used in an industry.”
Which Inventions are Patentable?
Innovations Innovations
Section 3
exclusions
Section 4
exclusions
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
18
mere use of a known process, machine, or apparatus
(unless such known process results in a new product
or employs at least one new reactant); and (iv)
an invention which is frivolous or which claims
anything obviously contrary to well established
natural laws.
By the Second Amendment, the following have been
added to the innovations that are not inventions
within the meaning of the Patents Act:
“j. plants and animals in whole or any part thereof
other than micro-organisms but including seeds,
varieties and species and essentially biological
processes for production or propagation of plants
and animals;
k. a mathematical or business method or a
computer program per se or algorithms;
l. a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work
or any other aesthetic creation whatsoever
including cinematographic works and television
productions;
m. a mere scheme or rule or method of performing
mental act or method of playing game;
n. a presentation of information;
o. a topography of integrated circuits;
p. an invention which, in effect, is traditional
knowledge or which is an aggregation or
duplication of known properties of traditionally
known component or components.”
Interesting omissions are those of business methods
and computer programs per se.
II. Business Method Patents
Historically, in nearly every country “business
methods” were dismissed as abstract and hence,
were considered to be unpatentable. However, in
the late 1990s, in what is known as the State Street
Bank case47 the US Federal Circuit for the first time
allowed a business method patent and a patent for
a computer program to track mutual funds.In Bilski
v. Kappos,48 the US Supreme Court dwelled into the
issue of business method patents and held that the
US Patent Act does contemplate business method
patent and thus business method patent are not
excluded subject matter.49
However, traditional requirements of practical
utility, novelty, and non-obviousness have to be
satisfied. The European Patent Convention (“EPC”)
explicitly excludes business method patents from
patentability.50 However the EPC also states that
business methods are excluded from patentability
only to the extent to which a European patent
application relates to a business method i.e. “as
such”. The European Technical Board of Appeal
has held time and again that if the subject matter
of the application can be shown to have a technical
character i.e. it is not a mere business method. In
India, due to the express exclusion of “business
method” from patentable inventions, business
method patents cannot be granted.
III. Computer Programs Per Se
The 2002 Amendment to the Patents Act stated that
“computer programs per se” is not an “invention”
- raising a debate whether a computer program
(“CP”) with any additional features such as technical
features, would be patentable. In Sec 3(k) of the
Act, while maintaining that CP per se is not an
invention, the Ordinance had created exclusion
for certain CPs. CP, in its technical application to
industry and CP in combination with hardware
were identified as patentable inventions.51 This
exclusion introduced by the Ordinance has been
done away with by the Third Amendment, once
again creating an ambiguity in respect of grant of CP
patents. ‘Computer programs per se’ was interpreted,
based on similar UK law, that CP’s with a technical
effect could be patentable. Experts were already
interpreting ‘computer programs per se’ on similar
lines. Ordinance, made things even clearer. However,
now it may be difficult to use the same interpretation
as it could be argued that if the intention of the
statute was to allow patenting CP’s having a
technical effect, why did the lawmakers not retain
the language of the Ordinance. Thus there is now
additional uncertainty in interpretation of ‘computer
programme per se’.
On June 28th, 2013 the India Patent Office released
47. 149 F.3d 1368.
48. 130 S. Ct. 3218.
49. The court looked into the definition of “process” in § 100(b) includes the word “method” which comprehends a presence of a business method.
Further, 35 U.S.C. § 273(b) (1) also provides a defense to patent infringement for prior use of a “method of conducting or doing business” this clearly
shows that the statute contemplates business method patents because it provides for a defense of patent infringement relating to business method
patents. - Id at page 10 and 11.
50. Article 52 (2) (c) of the EPC excludes methods for doing business from patentability.
51. The New patents ordinance gives IT a breather <eco-times/2005/New-patents-ordinance-Jan-16-2005.htm>, January 16, 2005.
Patents
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
19
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
draft Guidelines for Examination of Computer
Related Inventions (CRI) to invite public comments.
The Guidelines provide standards / procedures to
determine whether the CRI claims are falling under
the scope of non-patentable subject matter under
Section 3k of India Patent Act, 1970 (as amended).
Feedback has been provided by various stakeholders
to these draft guidelines. The Patent office has not
yet released a final copy of these guidelines. The
guidelines once finalized will be very helpful for
various stakeholders to determine patentability of
computer implemented inventions.
IV.Pharma and Agro-Chemical
Patents
The Third Amendment has deleted Section 5 of the
Act, which barred patent being granted in respect of
substances:
￭ intended for use or capable of being used as food,
medicine, or drugs; or,
￭ prepared or produced by chemical processes
(including alloys, optical glass, semi-conductors
and inter-metallic compounds).
Thus, product patents for pharmaceutical substances
are allowed in India. Section 3 of the Act, however,
carves out certain exceptions. Under Section 3 (j)
plants and animals in whole or any part thereof
(other than micro-organisms) including seeds,
varieties and species and essentially biological
processes for the production of plants or animals –
cannot be patented. This is in line with Article 27.3
of TRIPS. Thus micro-organisms, which satisfy the
patentability criteria, may be patented in India.
Section 3(d) as amended by the Third Amendment
clarifies that mere discovery of a new form of
a known substance, which does not result in
the enhancement of the known efficacy of that
substance is not an invention and therefore not
patentable. For the purposes of this clause, salts,
esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure
form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers,
complexes, combinations and other derivatives of
known substances are to be considered to be the
same substances, unless they differ significantly in
properties with regard to efficacy. Therefore, “Swiss
Claims”are not allowed in India.52
Section 3(d), Reads as Under
“Section 3- The following are not inventions within
the meaning of this Act,
(d)- the mere discovery of a new form of a known
substance which does not result in the enhancement
of known efficacy of that substance or the mere
discovery of any new property or new use for a
known substance or that the mere use of a known
process, machine or apparatus unless such known
process results in a new product or employs atleast
one new reactant.
Explanation- For the purposes of this clause, salts,
esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form,
practical size, isomers, and mixtures of isomers,
complexes, combinations and other derivatives
of a known substance shall be considered the
same substance, unless they differ significantly in
properties with regard to efficacy.”
This provision had caused quite a stir when it was
enacted primarily by Big Pharma as this Section was
enacted to prevent evergreening of patents. Further,
since there was not much clarity on how known
substances are to be determined, what efficacy is
and how to prove enhancement of efficacy a lot
of litigation surrounding this Section was being
initiated at various judicial and quasi-judicial
forums as the patent office had rejected many
pharmaceutical patent application under Section
3 (d). The most seminal case in this regard was the
Swiss pharmaceutics giant, Novartis AG (“Novartis”)
rejection of its Indian patent application for the
beta crystalline form of Imatinib Mesylate filed
in July 1998 on the grounds of Section 3 (d) when
the application was examined post 2005. This case
finally made it to the Indian Supreme Court (“SC”)
which delivered a landmark judgment on April 1,
2013, rejecting Novartis Patent application.
V. Recent judicial decisions
relating to Patents in India
Novartis AG vs. Union of India53
Novartis AG (“Novartis”) had filed an Indian patent
application for the beta crystalline form of Imatinib
Mesylate in July 1998. Due to the impending change
52. A ‘Swiss Claim’ is a claim wherein the use of a substance or composition that has already been used for a medical purpose is intended or specified to
be used for a new medical purpose.
53. AIR 2013 SC 1311
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
20
in patent regime, the application was “kept in
mailbox”. The application received five pre grant
oppositions. In 2006, the application was rejected
on the basis that the application lacked novelty, was
obvious and was not an invention in view of Section
3(d) of the Act. The Controller held that the Product
was a new version of an older molecule that Novartis
first patented in 1993 and the increment in efficacy
is not substantial enough to receive the grant of a
patent. An appeal was preferred before the Madras
High Court, during the pendency of which, the case
was transferred to the Intellectual Property Appellate
Board (“IPAB”). The IPAB upheld the decision of
the Controller with respect to the finding that the
patentability of the drug was barred under Section
3(d). A Special Leave Petition was filed by Novartis in
the Indian Supreme Court (“SC”) appealing against
the decision of the Controller. The SC made an
exception and admitted the Special Leave Petition
side-stepping the jurisdiction of the Madras High
Court, in view of the importance of the case and the
number of seminal issues that were involved in the
case. The SC noted that this was an exception and
any attempt directly challenging an IPAB order.
before the SC side-stepping the High Court, was
strongly discouraged.
The invention as claimed in the patent application
was the beta-crystalline form of Imatinib Mesylate.
This was a derivative of the free base form called
Imatinib disclosed vide example 21 of a patent
application filed by Novartis in US on April 2, 1993
(“Zimmermann patent”).
Novartis’ argument was that the known substance
was Imatinib as disclosed in Zimmerman patent
from which beta-crystalline form of Imatinib
Mesylate was derived and that the substance
immediately preceding beta crystalline form of
Imatinib Mesylate was Imatinib and not Imatinib
Mesylate as the Zimmerman patent did not disclose
Imatinib Mesylate. The SC rejected this argument
after examining the evidence on record and
concluded that the known substance was Imatinib
Mesylate from which beta-crystalline form of
Imatinib Mesylate was derived.
Since the term “efficacy” is not defined in the
Act, the SC referred to the Oxford Dictionary and
observed that Efficacy means “the ability to produce
a desired or intended result”. Accordingly the SC
observed that the test of efficacy depends “upon the
function, utility or the purpose of the product under
consideration”. Therefore, the SC held that in case of
medicines, whose function is to cure disease, the test
of efficacy can only be “therapeutic efficacy”.
In relation to “enhanced efficacy”, the SC held that
the parameters for proving enhanced therapeutic
efficacy especially in case of medicines should
receive a narrow and a strict interpretation.
However, the SC pointed out that just because the
word ‘efficacy’ has to be given a strict interpretation
under Section 3 (d), that does not in any way mean
that it bars all incremental inventions of chemical
and pharmaceutical substances. Essentially Section
3 (d) provides a bar that incremental inventions of
chemical and pharmaceutical substances need to
pass in order to be patentable.
The SC had concluded that the known substance
was Imatinib Mesylate and not free base Imatinib.
However, all the evidence submitted by Novartis
compared the efficacy of the Product with that of
Imatinib, but there was no evidence provided by
Novartis which compared the efficacy of the Product
with that of Imatinib Mesylate.
However, SC went on to examine the expert
affidavits submitted by Novartis according to which
the following properties exhibited by the Product
demonstrated its enhanced efficacy over Imatinib:
i. more beneficial flow properties
ii. better thermodynamic stability
iii. lower hygroscopicity; and
iv. 30 % increase in bio-availability.
The SC held that the first three properties of the
Product related to improving processability and
storage, thus they did not in any way demonstrate
enhancement of therapeutic efficacy over Imatinib
Mesylate as required to pass the test of Section
3(d). The SC came to this conclusion even though
the affidavits submitted by Novartis compared the
Product over Imatinib.
The SC after this was left with 30 % increase in
bio-availability, with regard to this the SC held
that increase in bioavailability could lead to
enhancement of efficacy but it has to be specifically
claimed and established by research data. In this
case the SC did not find any research data to this
effect other than the submission of the counsel and
material “to indicate that the beta-crystalline form
of Imatinib Mesylate will produce an enhanced or
superior efficacy (therapeutic) on molecular basis
than that could be achieved with Imatinib free base
in vivo animal”.
In view of the above findings the SC held and
concluded that Novartis claim for the Product failed
the test of patentability under Section 3 (d) of the
Act.
Patents
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
21
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. and Anr. vs.
Cipla Ltd.
F.Hoffmann-La Roche AG (“Roche”), the patentee of
the small cell lung cancer drug Erlotinib (sold under
brand name Tarceva) in January, 2008 filed a suit
for injunction at the High Court of Delhi54 against
Cipla Ltd., for allegedly infringing its patent in the
drug Erlotinib by engaging in manufacturing and
selling of generic version of Erlotinib in India, under
the brand name “Erlocip”. The Delhi High Court
refused interim injunctive relief to the patentee on
the ground of “public interest”. While, determining
the balance of convenience, the Court interestingly
found it relevant to consider the difference in
the market price of the two drugs in dispute. The
Court opined that in the present matter involving
a lifesaving drug, “the balancing would have to
factor in imponderables such as the likelihood of
injury to unknown parties and the potentialities
of risk of denial of remedies.” Further, the Court
held that “as between the two competing public
interests, that is, the public interest in granting an
injunction to affirm a patent during the pendency
of an infringement action, as opposed to the public
interest in access for the people to a lifesaving drug,
the balance has to be tilted in favor of the latter.”55
Roche appealed against this interim order to a
division bench of the same court.56 In April 2009,
the Court not only upheld the interim order but also
imposed a penalty of INR 500,000 for not making
full disclosure about the specification of the product
whose patent is claimed to have been infringed
amounting to suppression of material facts. Cipla
was able to raise a serious prima facie doubt, whether
the drug Tarceva sold in the Indian markets did, in
fact, correspond to the drug protected by the patent
that was allegedly being infringed.
A final decision in this case was rendered by the
Delhi High Court vide an order dated September 7,
2012.57 The Court held that Cipla’s product does not
fall within the scope of the claims of the Roche’s
patent and thus Cipla did not infringe Roche’s patent.
Further, Cipla had challenged validity of Roche’s
patent on multiple grounds in its counterclaim. The
court dwelled on these grounds in detail but did not
find any basis for invalidating Roche’s patent. The
court examined how the test of non-obviousness
should be applied in case of chemical patents.
Interestingly, this is the first Indian case wherein
an Indian court has rendered a final decision on
pharmaceutical patent infringement after an
extensive trail. This judgment is landmark because
it lays down principles for patent infringement
analysis. The court borrowed heavily from
the English Law on this issue, since the Indian
jurisprudence on this issue is almost nil.
The court held that in cases where there exists a
patented claim for a product and the impugned
product which may substantially contain the
patented product but also contain some other
variants or some other parts in addition to the
patented article or product, the test of purposive
construction has to be used to determine whether
the impugned product infringes the patent or not.
The court has held that this is the test to be followed
even in cases of pharmaceutical patented products or
process.
According to the rule of purposive construction, if
a person skilled in the art understands that strict
compliance with the claims of the patent is intended
by the patentee to be an essential requirement of the
invention then any variant of the patented invention
would fall outside the scope of the claim, even when
the role of the variant does not have any material
effect upon the way the invention is worked.
However, in cases where the variant attached to
the invented work would have material bearing
upon the working of the invention then the rule of
purposive construction is not applicable as in those
cases the variant attached would exclude the product
in question from the ambit of the patented claim and
thereby there will be no infringement of patent.
Further, there is an exception to this exception and
this occurs when it is proved on record that from the
reading of the patented claim the patentee could not
have intended to exclude the minor variants which
to the knowledge of him as well as readers of the
patent could have no material effect in the way in
which the invention worked. Thus, in cases where
the impugned product or process is a minor variant
of the patented invention there is an infringement of
the patent. This exception can be sub categorized as
below:-
i. That one has to show through evidence as to
what is missing in the patented claim and the
product in question is a minor variant;
54. I.A. No. 642/2008 in CS (OS) 89/2008 decided on 19.03.2008 [2008(37) PTC71 (Del)].
55. The Court stated that Cipla’s drug cost INR 1600 per tablet as compared to Roche’s Tarceva at INR 4800 per tablet.
56. FAO (OS) No. 188 of 2008 decided on 24.04.2009.
57. C.S.(O.S).No. 89 of 2008 decided on 07.09.2012.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
22
ii. That there could not have been intention of the
patentee to exclude such minor variant from the
ambit of invention;
iii. That the said minor variant could have no
material effect on the way in which the invention
worked.
In summary under the principle of purposive
construction the infringement analysis has to be
undertaken in three steps.
Step 1
Whether a person skilled in the art based on reading
of the specification would understand that the
patentee intended strict compliance with the claims
of the patent to be essential to the invention. If, yes
then any variant of the patent will not amount to an
infringement of the patent.
Step 2
In case where the variant of the patented invention
is a major variant and has material bearing upon
the working of the invention. If, yes then there is no
infringement of the patent.
Step 3
In case where the patentee did not intend to exclude
minor variant of the invention and the said minor
variant does not have any material impact on the
way the invention is worked. If, Yes then there is an
infringement of the patent.
Monsanto – IPAB Decision
Monsanto Technology LLC (Monsanto) had filed a
patent application on May 1, 2006 titled “A method
for producing a transgeneic plant with increased
heat tolerance, salt tolerance or drug tolerance”.
In addition to other grounds the patent application
was refused by the Indian Patent Office (IPO) on
ground that the claims were essentially a biological
process for the production or propagation of plants
under Section 3 (j) of the Act.
Monsanto appealed the decision of the IPO before the
IPAB. With respect to Section 3 (j) IPAB held that the
IPO had erred in finding the claims as an “essentially
biological process” under section 3(j) of Act.
Monsanto contended that the claims of the
subject application do not fall within the ambit of
section 3(j) of the Act as they do not constitute an
“essentially biological process.” The claims involve
human intervention in the: steps of “inserting
into the genome of plant cells a recombinant
DNA molecule comprising a DNA encoding a cold
shock protein” and “obtaining transformed plant
cell containing said recombinant DNA”. Even
the selection step in the claim involves human
intervention. Thus, it is not possible to obtain
the transgenic plant without substantial human
intervention.
Monsanto also relied on a decision of the Enlarged
Board of Appeal of the European Patent Office
T1242/06 wherein it had been held that a process
which contains in addition to a step of sexually
crossing a selection step of technical nature which,
would introduce a trait or modify a trait in the
genome of the plant produced and this introduction
or modification of that trait in the genome is not the
result of mixing the genes of the plant chosen for
sexual crossing then the process is not essentially a
biological process. Thus, the invention in question
involved human interference and was not essentially
a biological process and hence was not barred from
patenablity under Section 3 (1) (j) of the Act.
The IPAB held that the current claims being perused
were directed to a series of individual steps that
involves an act of human intervention on a plant cell
that results in some change to the plant cell. Thus,
the method as claimed is not essentially a biological
process and is not barred from patentability under
Section 3 (j) of the Act.
Indian Network for People Living with
HIV/AIDS and Anr. Vs Union of India
and Ors.58
In a case involving another Roche patent for
the antiviral drug Valcyte (Valganciclovir
hydrochloride), the Chennai Patent Office, in
January 2009, dismissed a pre-grant opposition
representation that had been filed by two Non
Governmental Organisations - Indian Network
for People living with HIV/AIDS and Tamil Nadu
Networking People with HIV/AIDS in June 2006.
Roche had filed a Patent Application in 1995.
The opponents had filed a pre-grant opposition
under Section 25(1) of the Patents Act, 1970
accompanied by a specific request for a hearing
in the matter. The Controller did not allow oral
hearing to the two NGOs in relation to their
58. Writ Petition No. 24904 of 2008 and M.P. Nos. 2 & 3 of 2008 decided by High Court of Madras on December 2, 2008.
Patents
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
23
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
representation and proceeded to grant the patent
to Roche. The opponents filed a writ petition
against the controller’s order with High Court of
Madras wherein the court held that the grant of
Roche’s patent without hearing the Opponents’
representation was “in blatant violation of statutory
procedure by the statutory authority, which is
acting in a quasi-judicial capacity” and directed
the Controller to grant hearing to the opponents.
The opponents were heard by the Controller in
January 2009. However, the pre-grant opposition was
dismissed.59 Nevertheless, this decision of the High
Court of Madras has demonstrated the vigilance of
the courts on patent office procedure.
VI. Mashelkar Committee Report
In December 2006, the Technical Expert Group
constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. R.A.
Mashelkar and set up by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, released its recommendations on
Patent Law Issues (“Mashelkar Committee Report”).
The committee’s recommendations were put forth
pursuant to debates raised at the Parliament level
with respect to bringing the Patents Act at par
with India’s international obligations, specifically
under the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement).
The Mashelkar Committee Report dealt with two
issues, namely:
i. Whether restricting the grant of patents for
pharmaceutical substances to new chemical
entities (“NCEs”) or new medical entities
(“NMEs”) involving one or more inventive steps
would be TRIPS compatible; and
ii. Whether excluding micro-organisms from patent
protection would violate TRIPS.
The Mashelkar Committee Report had concluded
that limiting the grant of patents for pharmaceutical
substances to NCEs and NMEs would contravene
the TRIPS provisions. The conclusion drawn in
respect of the second issue, in light of Article 27.360,
was that excluding micro-organisms, per se, from
patent protection would be in violation of the TRIPS
Agreement.
The Mashelkar Committee Report was eventually
withdrawn on grounds of technical inaccuracy and
plagiarism. In light of the plagiarism controversy,
Dr. R.A. Mashelkar resigned as the head of the
committee, and the committee was once again given
an opportunity by the Government to correct the
‘technical inaccuracies’ and to re-submitting their
report. Thereafter, in March 2009, the revised report
was re-submitted to the Government.
The conclusions in the revised Report are essentially
on similar lines as those contained in its 2006 version.
The Report in conclusion remarks that the grant of
patents for pharmaceutical substances only to a NCE
or NME despite satisfying the basic requirements of
patentability may prima facie amount to ‘excluding
a field of technology’ in light of Article 27.1 of
TRIPS that states: “…patents shall be available for
any inventions, whether products or processes,
in all fields of technology, provided that they are
new, involve an inventive step and are capable of
industrial application”. Thus, such a limitation on
pharmaceutical patents may be held as TRIPS noncompatible.
In addition, the Report recommended that “every
effort must be made to prevent the practice of ‘evergreening’ ……….by making claims based sometimes
on ‘trivial’ changes to the original patented product.”
The Indian Patent Office has the full authority under
law and practice to determine what is patentable.
Further, such authority should decide what would
constitute only a trivial change with no significant
additional improvements or inventive steps
involving benefits in order to prevent ‘ever-greening’,
rather than introduce a “statutory exclusion”
of incremental innovations from the scope of
patentability.
While the terms ‘ever-greening’ and ‘incremental
innovation’ is not defined in any Indian patent
legislation, the 2006 version of the Mashelkar
Committee Report explained the two terms as
follows:
“While ‘ever-greening’ refers to an extension of a
patent monopoly, achieved by executing trivial and
insignificant changes to an already existing patented
product, ‘incremental innovations’ are sequential
developments that build on the original patented
product and may be of tremendous value in a
country like India.”
59. Decision of the Chennai Patent Office dated January 30, 2009in the matter of patent application no. 959/MAS/1995.
60. Article 27.3 of the TRIPS Agreement states that Members may also exclude from patentability:
“(a) diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical method for the treatment of humans or animals;
(b) plants and animals other than micro-organisms, and essentially biological processes for the production of plants and animals other than nonbiological and microbiological processes.”
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
24
However, no such guidelines on the interpretation of
the two terms appear in the revised version.
VII. Who can be the Applicant?
India grants patent right on a first-to-apply basis. The
application can be made by either (i) the inventor
or (ii) the assignee61 or legal representative62 of the
inventor. Foreign applicants are given national
treatment.
VIII.What is the Process of
Registration?
Patent rights with respect to any invention are
created only upon grant of the patent by the Patent
Office following the procedure established by the
Patents Act and the Rules. India follows a declarative
system for patent rights. Below are the three types of
applications that may be filed in the Indian Patent
Office:
i. Regular Application
ii. Convention Application
India has published a list of convention countries
under Section 133 of the Patents Act and is also a
member of the Paris Convention. The convention
application has to be filed within one year from
the date of priority and has to specify the date on
which, and the convention country in which the
application for protection (first application) was
made. The priority document has to be filed with the
application.
iii. Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) National Phase
Application
A National Phase Application may be filed in
India as India is a PCT member country. Since
December 2007, the Indian Patent Office has also
been recognized as one of the many International
Searching Authorities (ISA) and International
Preliminary Examining Authorities (IPEA)
nominated by World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO). The office is expected to soon
start operations in this capacity.
The procedure for filing and obtaining patent in
India is as shown overleaf.
61. Section 2(1) (ab) of the Patents Act: “Assignee includes an assignee of the assignee and the legal representative of the deceased assignee and references to the assignee of any person include references to the assignee of the legal representative or assignee of that person”.
62. Section 2(1) (k) of the Patents Act: “Legal representative means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person.”
On the date the application is filed, it is numbered.
Generally within a month of filing the application, the Patent Office sends a preliminary
objection letter, which has to be complied with within a specified time limit.
The application is published in the Official Gazette and is open to public after eighteen
months from the date of filing of application or the date of priority of the application,
whichever is earlier. An application for earlier publication could be filed by the applicant.
PRE-GRANT OPPOSITION
Within 3 months from the date of publication or
before the grant of patent whichever is later - any
person may file opposition on limited grounds.
Opposition is considered only when request for
examination filed.
FILING OF THE
APPLICATION
MEETING PROCEDURAL
OBJECTIONS
PUBLICATION OF THE
APPLICATION
REQUEST FOR EXAMINATION
A request for examination to be filed by the applicant
or any other interested person within 36 months
from the date of priority or filing of the patent
application, whichever is earlier.
Patents
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
25
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
IX. Opposition Proceedings
The Patents Act allows both pre-grant and postgrant opposition. The pre-grant opposition can be
filed anytime after the publication of the patent
application but before a patent is granted. The postgrant opposition can be filed within a period of one
year from the date of publication of the granted
patent. The grounds on which pre-grant opposition
and post-grant opposition can be filed are similar.
X. What is the term of a Patent?
Every patent granted under the Act shall be dated as
of the date on which the complete specification was
filed The Second Amendment prescribed a uniform
term of 20 years from the date of filling the patent
application in India63 for all categories of patents
in compliance with Article 33 of TRIPS. There is
no provision for an extension of the patent term.
Term of patent in case of applications filed under
the PCT designating India is twenty years from the
international filling date.64
XI. Secrecy Provisions65
Any person resident in India is not allowed to apply
for grant of patent for any invention unless either of
the following two conditions is satisfied:
￭ Obtaining written permission of the Controller
of Patents. The Controller is required to obtain
consent of the Central Government before
granting such permission for invention relevant
for defense purpose / atomic energy. The
application is to be disposed of within 3 months.
OR
￭ Patent application for the same invention has
been first filed in India at least six weeks before
the application outside India and there is no
direction passed under Section 35 for prohibiting
/ restricting publication / communication of
information relating to invention.
This section is not applicable in relation to an invention
for which an application for protection has first been
filed in a country outside India by a person resident
outside India. Inspite of this exclusion, this provision
is likely to delay the filing of US applications since US
applications are required to be filed by the inventors
and not assignees of the inventors.
XII. Can the Patent be
Surrendered?
A patentee may surrender his patent under Section
63 at any time by giving notice to the Controller in
the prescribed manner.
63. Section 53 of the Patents Act.
64. Explanation to Section 53 of the Patents Act
65. Sections 35 to 43 of the Patents Act; Can you keep a secret? <eco-times/2005/Can-you-keep-a-secret-Feb-14-2005.htm>, February 13, 2005.
The applicant has to comply with the objections to put the application in order for
acceptance within 6 months from the date of the Report. This period could be
extended by another three months by filing an application to that effect.
If the Applicant complies with objections raised in the First Statement of Objections
within 6 months (extendable by 3 months) from the date of First Statement. Else the
application is deemed to have been abandoned.
Within 1 year from the date of publication of grant of a patent, any person interested
may file an Opposition on the grounds enlisted in Section 25(3).
MEETING THE OFFICIAL
OBJECTIONS
GRANT OF THE PATENT
POST-GRANT OPPOSITION
The Examiner of Patents is required to issue a First Examination Report, within one
month but not exceeding three months from the date of the reference. This Report
raises various substantive and procedural objections.
FIRST EXAMINATION
REPORT
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
26
XIII.How can the Patent be
Cancelled / Revoked?
Either the Intellectual Property Appellate Board
(IPAB) by way of a revocation application filed under
Section 64 of the Patent Act or the High Court by
way of a counter-claim in a suit for infringement of
the patent may pass orders for revocation of a patent.
In a patent infringement action, the defendant can
raise the grounds for cancellation as defenses and at
the same time file a counterclaim for revocation. The
grounds on which the patent can be revoked include
wrongful procurement of invention, false suggestion
or representation in obtaining patent, failure
to disclose corresponding foreign applications,
prior secret use, prior grant, lack of novelty, or
obviousness. The Controller of Patents also has the
power to revoke the patent if, despite the grant of
a compulsory license, the reasonable requirements
of the public with respect to the patented invention
remain unsatisfied or if the patented invention is not
available to the public at a reasonable price.
XIV. Assignment / Mortgage /
License of Patent
An assignment of a patent or a share in a patent,
a mortgage, license, or the creation of any other
interest in a patent is only valid if the following
conditions are satisfied:
￭ There is a written agreement embodying all
the terms and conditions governing rights and
obligations of parties; and,
￭ The agreement is registered by filing Form 16
under the Patents Rules, 2003 with the patent
office that has granted the patent.
Registration can be done at any time after the
assignment is done.
However, the agreement, when registered, is effective
as of the date of its execution.66 The consequence of
non-registration is that the agreement under which
the patent rights are transferred is not admissible
as evidence in an Indian court and therefore not
enforceable in legal proceedings.67
XV. Working of a Patent
It is mandatory under Indian patent law to file a
statement as to the extent of commercial working
in the Indian territory of a patent granted by Indian
Patent Office.68 The statement embodied in Form 27
of the Patents Rules, 2003 is required to be filed in
respect of every calendar year within three months
of the end of each year (i.e. before March 31st of every
year). Non-compliance with this requirement may
invite penalty of imprisonment which may extend
to six months, or with fine, or with both, as provided
under section 122(1) (b) of the Patents Act. Section
83 of the Patents Act states “that patents are granted
in India to encourage inventions and to secure those
inventions are worked in India on a commercial
scale and to the fullest extent reasonably practicable
without undue delay”.
XVI. Compulsory Licensing
The Patent Act provides for the grounds on and
procedures by which, a compulsory license can be
granted. The grounds on which a compulsory license
can be granted are:
￭ Reasonable requirements of the public with
respect to the patented invention have not been
satisfied; or,
￭ The patented invention is not available to the
public at a reasonably affordable price; or,
￭ The patented invention is not worked (i.e. not
used or performed) in the territory of India.
The following factors are also to be taken into
account: a circumstance of national emergency;
a circumstance of extreme urgency; or a case of
public non-commercial use, which may arise or
is required, as the case may be, including public
health crises such as those relating to Acquired
Immuno Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Tuberculosis,
Malaria, or other epidemics.
However, the Patents Act does not provide
the definitions of the following expressions:
“circumstance of national emergency”; and “a
circumstance of extreme urgency.” Therefore,
the courts would be required to interpret these
expressions on a case-by-case basis.
66. Section 68 of the Patents Act. Section 69 describes the procedure for the recording of interest.
67. Section 69(5) of the Patents Act.
68. Section 146 of the Patents Act and Rule 131(2) of Patents Rules, 2003.
Patents
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
27
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
Any person interested in working the patented
invention may apply to the Controller of Patents for
a compulsory license at any time after three years
have elapsed from the date of grant of the patent.
While examining the application, the Controller
also considers such aspects as the nature of the
invention; the time that has elapsed since the grant
of the patent and the measures already taken by
the patentee or any licensee to make full use of the
invention; the ability of the applicant to work the
invention for public advantage; and the capacity
of the applicant to undertake the risk in providing
capital and working the invention, if the application
were granted.69
Section 92A provides for grant of license to
manufacture and export the patented product to any
country having insufficient or no manufacturing
capacity in the pharmaceutical sector to address
public health problems, provided a compulsory
license has been granted in that country or, if
such country has allowed importation of the
patented pharmaceutical products from India.
The amendment seeks to implement the Para 6 of
Doha Declaration on TRIPS and public health. This
provision will allow Indian companies to produce
and export AIDS drugs to African and South East
Asian countries.
Natco v Bayer70 and Compulsory
License cases in India
In March 2012, the Controller General of Patents
created history with a landmark judgment granting
the first ever Compulsory License to an Indian
generic company. It permitted Natco Pharma to
manufacture and sell a generic version of Bayer
Corporation’s patent protected anti-cancer drug
‘Sorafenib Tosyalte’ (marketed as NEXAVAR). The
drug was useful in treating advanced liver and
kidney cancer. Natco had filed an application for
Compulsory License under Section 84(1), Patents
Act, 1970. It had earlier approached Bayer with a
request for a voluntary license proposing to sell the
drug at a greatly reduced price, which Bayer did
not allow. The Controller found that all the three
conditions71 required for the grant of compulsory
license were fulfilled and that this case merited the
award of compulsory license to Natco. On appeal,
the IPAB held that Bayer did not meet the reasonable
requirement of the public (as only 2% patients
are eligible for the same) and that the price of the
drug (Rs. 2.8 lakhs per month) was not reasonably
affordable in India when the purchasing power of
the public is taken into consideration. This was the
first case in which a request under Section 84 of the
Indian Patent Act, 1970 had been made, seeking the
grant of compulsory license.
Since the Bayer-Natco decision, there have been two
more instances where Compulsory Licenses have
been applied for. In the first instance, the Health
Ministry applied to the Department of Industrial
Policy and Promotion for the grant of Compulsory
License for cancer drug Trastuzumab, which was
marketed in India as Herceptin by Genentech and
Herclon by Roche. The request was made under
Section 92 of the Patents Act, 1970, which allows the
Government to file for a license in case of national
emergency. This was on the ground that the drug
was not affordable. However, the DIPP rejected this
request as it found that the requirements for grant of
compulsory license under Section 92 of the Indian
Patent Act, 1970 was not satisfied
A request was also made by Indian generic drug
manufacturer, BDR Pharmaceutical with respect to
cancer drug Dacatinib, marketed by Bristol Myers
Squibb as Sprycel under Section 84 of the Indian
Patents Act for grant of compulsory license. An order
was passed by the Controller of Patents on 29th
October, 2013 wherein the compulsory licensing
application was rejected on the basis that a prima
facie case had not been made out since BDR had not
followed the procedural requirements as prescribed
under the law before applying for the compulsory
license application. In view of this the Controller of
Patents did not go into the merits and rejected the
compulsory license application.
Rights of the Applicant Post
Publication
From the date of publication of the application
until the date of the grant of a patent, the applicant
has the like privileges and rights as if a patent
for the invention has been granted on the date of
publication of the application. However, applicant
is not entitled to institute any proceedings for
infringement until the patent has been granted.
69. Section 84 of the Patents Act.
70. Compulsory Application No. 1 of 2011 available at http://www.ipindia.nic.in/ipoNew/compulsory_License_12032012.pdf
71. (a) that the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the patented invention have not been satisfied, or (b) that the patented invention is
not available to the public at a reasonably affordable price, or (c) that the patented invention is not worked in the territory of India.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
28
XVII. Infringement
Section 48 of the Act grants the following rights to
the patentee.
In the case of a product patent, the following actions
would amount to infringement:
￭ making,
￭ using,
￭ offering for sale,
￭ selling, or
￭ importing for these purposes, the product in
India without the permission of the patentee.
In the case of a process patent, the following would
amount to infringement:
￭ using,
￭ offering for sale,
￭ selling, or
￭ importing for these purposes the product
obtained directly by that process in India without
the permission of the patentee.
Any person without the consent of the patentee
performs the above activities of the infringes the
patent.
In patent infringement suits, the damages are not
granted for the use of the patented invention during
the period prior to the date of acceptance of the
patent application.
In a patent infringement action, the defendant can
file a counterclaim for a revocation of the patent.
Consequently, the main suit and the counterclaim
are heard together.
A. What acts do not Constitute
Infringement?
Section 107A in the Act, incorporates Bolar provision
and provision for parallel imports. Section 107A
states that the following acts do not constitute
infringement:
￭ Any act of making, constructing, using, selling
or importing a patented invention solely for
uses reasonably related to the development and
submission of information required under any
Indian law, or law of a country other than India,
that regulates the manufacture, construction, use,
sale or import of any product;
￭ The importation of patented products by any
person from a person who is duly authorized by
the patentee under the law to produce and sell or
distribute the products.
i. Bolar Provision
In view of introduction of the product patent
regime, this provision will gain importance. Bolar
provision allows manufacturers to begin the
research and development process in time to ensure
that affordable equivalent generic medicines can be
brought to market immediately upon the expiry of
the product patent.
ii. Parallel Imports
A machine, though patented in India, can be
imported (without the consent of the patentee)
from the patentee’s agent, say, in China, who
manufactures it at a lower cost with the consent of
the patentee.
B. Reversal of Burden of Proof
The Second Amendment also inserted Section 104A
concerning the burden of proof in infringement
suits. The section provides that in any suit for
infringement of a process patent, the defendant may
be directed to prove that the process used by him to
obtain the product that is identical to the product of
the patented process, is different from the patented
process. Such direction may be passed by the court, if:
￭ the subject matter of the patent is a process for
obtaining a new product; or,
￭ there is a substantial likelihood that the identical
product is made by the process, and the patentee
or a person deriving title or interest in the patent
from him, has been unable through reasonable
efforts to determine the process actually used.
However, before obtaining such a direction, the
plaintiff (claimant) has to prove that the product
is identical to the product directly obtained by the
patented process.
C. Remedies in the Case of
Infringement72
In the case of infringement of the Indian patent,
72. Section 108 of the Patents Act.
Patents
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
29
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
the patentee can file a suit in the appropriate court,
which may be a District Court or a High Court. In
case a patent infringement suit is filed in a district
court and counter claim is filed by a defendant, the
patent infringement suit is transferred to a High
Court. In the infringement suit the plaintiff can
seek an injunction and damages or order for an
account for profits from the potential infringer of
the patent. Where the defendant proves that at the
time of infringement he was not aware of and had
no reasonable ground to believe that the patent
existed, an order for damages or accounts for profits
is not granted. Therefore, the patentee should
take steps to convey to the general public that his
product or process is patented. In an infringement
suit, infringing goods, materials, and equipment
used for their production can be seized, forfeited, or
destroyed. The courts can appoint suo motu, or on
application of a party to the suit, scientific advisors
to assist the court or to submit a report on a specified
question.73
The Patents Act does not provide for criminal action
in case of patent infringement.
XVIII. Patent Linkage
Internationally recognized patent linkage is a
process by which the drug regulatory authority (the
Drug Controller) delays or refuses to grant marketing
approval to a generic manufacturer to manufacture
and sell the drug, if the drug is patented. In effect it
links the marketing approval to the lifetime of the
patent. Such a system would require the generic
manufacturer to demonstrate before the Drug
Controller that the drug for which the marketing
approval is sought for is not covered by a patent.
In Bayer vs. Cipla74, Bayer had filed a writ petition
requesting the court to direct the Drug Controller
of India not to grant license to market Cipla’s drug
“Soranib” as it infringed Bayer’s Patent.
Bayer contended that Section 48 of the Patents Act,
which grants right to the patentee and Section 2 of
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act (DCA), should be read
together. Section 2 of the DCA provides that the DCA
shall not be in derogation of any other law and thus
the DCA cannot contravene the provisions of the
Patent Act. Therefore, any grant of license to CIPLA
for its drug “Soranib” by the drug controller would be
in contravention of section 48 of the Patents Act and
it is in contravention of Section 2 of the DCA, when
read together. Thus, the drug license should not be
granted. Further, Form 44 of the DCA75 also requires
applicant to mention the patent status of the drug in
question in the application, this shows a conscious
effort by the legislature to include patent linkage.
The court held that the Patents Act and the DCA
are two separate legislations and highlight distinct
and disparate objectives. The DCA prescribes
standards of safety and good manufacture practices,
which are to be followed by every pharmaceutical
industry whereas, Patent Act prescribes standards
for conferring private monopoly rights in favor
of inventors. Expertise that exist under the Patent
Act to adjudicate upon whether claimed products
or processes are patentable or not does not exist
with the officials under the DCA, who can only
test the safety of the product, and ensure that it
conforms to the therapeutic claim put forward.
The drug controller also lacks the jurisdiction
under the law to adjudicate on the issue of patent
infringement. Further the court held that there
is no intention on the part of the legislators to
place patent superintendence, or policing powers,
with Drug authorities. If the Drugs authorities,
on a representation of the patentee were to refuse
licenses or approval, to applicants who otherwise
satisfy the requirement of the Drugs Act and its
provisions, or even be precluded from examining
such applications, on assumed infringement, various
provisions of the Patent Act would be rendered a
dead letter.
The court also held that the requirement of
indication of patent status in Form 44 is only to
indicate bio availability and bio equivalence protocol
and does not in any way suggest the intention of the
legislature to include patent linkage.
73. Section 115 of the Patents Act.
74. 2009(41)PTC634(Del)
75. Form- 44:- Application for grant of permission to import or manufacture a New Drug or to undertake clinical trial.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
30
Industrial designs in India are protected under the
Designs Act, 2000 (“Designs Act”), which replaced the
Designs Act, 1911. The Designs Act has been in effect
since May 11, 2001. The Designs Rules, 2001 have
been framed under the Designs Act. The Designs
Act incorporates the minimum standards for the
protection of industrial designs, in accordance with
the TRIPS agreement. It provides for the introduction
of an international system of classification, as per the
Locarno Classification.
I. What is the Meaning “Design”
Within the Scope of the
Designs Act?
As per the Designs Act, “design” means only the
features of shape, configuration, pattern, ornament
or composition of lines or colours applied to any
“article”76 whether in two dimensional or three
dimensional or in both forms, by any industrial
process or means, whether manual mechanical
or chemical, separate or combined, which in the
finished article appeal to and are judged solely by the
eye. However, “design” does not include any mode
or principle of construction, or anything which is in
substance a mere mechanical device, and does not
include any trademark (as defined in section 2(1)
(v) of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958),
or property mark (as defined in section 479 of the
Indian Penal Code), or any artistic work (as defined
in Section 2 (c) of the Copyright Act, 1957).
In order to obtain registration under the Designs
Act, the design must be applied to an article. In
other words, a mere painting of a natural scene or its
presentation on paper is not entitled for registration
under the Designs Act.
II. Who can Apply for Registration
of a Design?
Any person claiming to be the “proprietor of any
new or original design”
77 not previously published
in any country and is not contrary to public order or
morality can apply for the registration of the design.
The expressions “public order” or “morality” have
not been defined in the Designs Act.
The term “original,” with respect to design, means
a design originating from the author of such a
design and includes the cases that, although old in
themselves, are new in their application. Absolute
novelty is now the criterion for registration.
III.What is the Process of
Registration?
The process of registration of a design under the
Designs Act requires the following steps:
￭ File an application for registration of design with
the prescribed fee with the Controller of Patents
and Designs. Photographs of the articles from all
angles must be filed along with the statement of
novelty.
￭ Reply to the objections raised by the Controller.
￭ Upon removal objections, the design is registered.
When registered, a design is deemed to have been
registered as of the date of the application for
registration.
￭ After registration, the particulars of the design are
published.
￭ If the Controller rejects the application, the
aggrieved person can appeal to the High Court.
7. Designs
76. Per Section 2(a) of the Designs Act: “article” means any article of manufacture and any substance, artificial, or partly artificial and partly natural; and
includes any part of an article capable of being made and sold separately.
77. Per Section 2(j) of the Designs Act: ”proprietor of a new or original design”,-
(i) where the author of the design, for good consideration, executes the work for some other person, means the person for whom the design is so executed;
(ii) where any person acquires the design or the right to apply the design to any article, either exclusively of any other person or otherwise, means, in the
respect and to the extent in and to which the design or right has been so acquired, the person b whom the design or right is so acquired; and
(iii) in any other case, means the author of the design; and where the property in or the right to apply, the design has devolved from the original proprietor upon any other person, includes that other person.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
31
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
There is no opposition procedure prior to
registration.
IV. What are the Rights
Conferred by Registration?
Registration of a design confers upon the registered
proprietor a “copyright” with respect to the design.
Under the Designs Act, the word “copyright” refers to
the exclusive right to apply the design to any article
in any class in which the design has been registered.
The first term of registration is ten years after which
it can be renewed for an additional five-year period.
V. Assignment
When a person becomes entitled by assignment,
transmission, or other operation of law to the
copyright of a registered design, a record of the
title must be registered by an application to the
Controller for the same, accompanied by the
prescribed fee and proof of title.
When a person becomes entitled to any right in
the registered design either by way of a mortgage, a
license, or otherwise, an application in the prescribed
form must be made to the Controller to register his
title.
VI. Cancellation of Design
Any person interested may present a petition for a
cancellation of the design registration at any time
after the registration, on the following grounds: that
the design has been previously registered in India;
that it has been published in India or in any other
country prior to the registration date; that the design
is not a new or original design; that the design is not
registrable under the Designs Act or that it is not a
design as defined under Section 2(d) of the Designs
Act. An appeal from any order by the Controller can
be filed with the High Court.
Section 15 of the Copyright Act, 1957 states that the
copyright in any design ,which is capable of being
registered under the Designs Act, but is not, will
lose its copyright as soon as the design has been
reproduced 50 times by an industrial process by
either the owner of the copyright or his licensee.
VII. Piracy
Section 22 of the Designs Act lists the different
acts that amount to piracy of the registered design,
including: 1) any application of the registered design
for the purpose of sale during the existence of the
copyright in the design without a license or the
express consent of the registered proprietor; 2) or
the importation for sale without the consent of the
registered proprietor of any article belonging to the
class in which the design has been registered and
having applied to it the design or any fraudulent or
obvious imitation; or, 3) knowing that the design, or
a fraudulent or obvious imitation has been applied
to any article in any class of articles in which the
design is registered, published, or exposed for sale,
without the consent of the registered proprietor of
such an article. Any grounds on which the design
can be cancelled can also be used as a defense in an
infringement action.
VIII. Remedies
The Designs Act provides for civil remedies in cases
of infringement of copyright in a design, but does
not provide for criminal actions. The civil remedies
available in such cases are injunctions, damages,
compensation, or delivery-up of the infringing
articles.
IX. Paris Convention
Reciprocity for the purpose of claiming priority is
now allowed from the applications originating from
the Paris Convention countries
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
32
Geographical Indications (“GI”) are those, which
identify a good as originating in a place where a given
quality, reputation, or other characteristic of the good
is essentially attributable to its geographical origin.
Some better-known examples of GI are “Champagne,”
“Bordeaux,” and “Chianti,” the first two being regions
in France and the third, a region in Italy, all famous
for their wines. In the Indian context, ‘Darjeeling Tea’
was the first GI registered under the GI Act. This GI
is registered in the name of the Tea Board of India
which also hold GI registrations for ‘Nilgiri Tea’ and
‘Assam Tea’. Similarly, the Coffee Board (under the
Ministry of Commerce & Industry) has a subsisting
registration for Malabar Coffee. Other well-known
GIs include ‘Kashmiri Pashmina’, ‘Mysore Silk’,
‘Lucknow Chicken Craft’ and ‘Feni’. The convention
application for ‘Champagne’ was filed in September
2008 and is in the process of registration.
The Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration
and Protection) Act, 1999 came into effect on
September 15, 2003. The Act was passed with
the goal of providing protection, as a GI, to any
agricultural, natural, or manufactured goods, or
to any goods of handicraft or industry, including
foodstuffs.
I. Registration
The Act provides for the registration of a GI and the
‘authorized user’ thereof. Any person claiming to be
the producer of goods in respect of a registered GI
can apply for registering him as an authorized user.
The authorized user is able to bring an action against
the wrongful users of GI. Convention applications
can also be filed under this Act.
An application for registration can be filed by any:-
￭ organisation of persons or producers, or
￭ organisation or authority established by or under
any law,
such organisation or authority representing the
interest of the producers of the concerned goods.
The office of the Geographical Indications Registry is
in Chennai.
To qualify as a GI, two requirements must be
satisfied: (i) the territorial aspect i.e. as to how the GI
serves to designate the goods originating from the
concerned territory, (ii) a given quality, reputation,
or other characteristic should be essentially
attributable to the geographical origin.
II. Rights Conferred by
Registration
Registration of a GI confers the following rights on
the registered proprietor and the authorized users:
￭ Right to obtain relief in respect of the
infringement of the GI; and
￭ Exclusive right to use the GI in relation to the
goods for which GI is registered
Two or more authorized users of a registered GI shall
have co-equal rights.
III. Classes
All the goods have been classified in accordance
with the International Classification of Goods for the
purposes of GI registration.
IV. Duration and Renewal
GI registration is valid for a period of ten years, and
may be renewed thereafter from time to time. The
registration of an authorized user is valid for a period
of ten years or for the period until the date on which
the GI registration expires, whichever is earlier.
V. Procedure for Registration
The procedure for registering a GI and procedure
for registering oneself as an authorized user are
substantially the same. The procedure is as follows:
8. Geographical Indications of Goods
(Registration and Protection) Act, 1999
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
33
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
FILE APPLICATION WITH THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS REGISTRY
AFTER ACCEPTANCE, THE APPLICATION IS ADVERTISED FOR OPPOSITION
IF AFTER PUBLICATION THE APPLICATION HAS NOT BEEN OPPOSED AND THE OPPOSITION PERIOD (3 MONTHS
EXTENDABLE FOR 1 MONTH THEREAFTER) HAS EXPIRED, THEN REGISTRATION IS GRANTED. THE DATE OF REGISTRATION
IS THE DATE ON WHICH THE APPLICATION IS FILED
VI. Prohibition of Assignment or
Transmission
GI, being a public proprietary right, is not assignable
or transmissible by any other means. Therefore,
the Act prohibits the assignment, transmission,
licensing, pledge, or mortgage or any such other
agreement in respect of a GI.
VII. Infringement
The Act also provides for infringement and passing
off actions, thus recognizing the common law right
in a GI, which includes civil as well as criminal
remedies. Infringement has been defined to include
unfair competition.
An action for infringement of a GI may be initiated
in a District Court or High Court having jurisdiction.
Available relief includes injunctions, discovery of
documents, damages or accounts of profits, deliveryup of the infringing labels, and indications for
destruction or erasure.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
34
This Act was enacted in order to comply with the
provisions of TRIPS. The Semiconductor Integrated
Circuits Layout Design Act, 2000 received the assent
of the President of India on September 4, 2000,
after it was approved by both Houses of the Indian
Parliament. However, the Act has not come into
effect yet. The obligations imposed under the TRIPS
and the Washington Treaty, 1980 made it mandatory
for India to enact a law to protect the layout designs
of Integrated Circuits (“IC”). This form of protection
is quite different from patents, industrial designs,
and copyrights, although the principles of protection
and enforcement stem from industrial design and
copyright.
As the Act has not come into effect yet, the existing
patent and copyright regime does not appropriately
accommodate the requirements of protection for the
layout design of IC. This is because in the context
of layout design of IC, the concept of “originality” is
of utmost significance, whether it is “novel or not”,
whereas the patent law requires that the idea should
be original and novel. On the other hand, the copyright
law is too general to accommodate the original ideas of
scientific creation of layout designs of IC.
In order to ascertain the nature of protection which
will be conferred on layout designs of IC on the
coming into force of this Act, we have analyzed some
of the salient features of the Act in the following
paragraphs.
I. Definitions
A. Layout Design
Layout design refers to a layout of transistors and
other circuitry elements and includes lead wires
connecting such elements and expressed in any
manner in a semiconductor integrated circuit.
B. Semiconductor Integrated Circuit
Semiconductor Integrated Circuit means a product
having transistors and other circuitry elements,
which are inseparably formed on semiconductor
material or insulating material, or inside the
semiconductor material, and designed to perform an
electronic circuitry function.
II. IC layout Designs not
Registrable in India
The following are layout-designs, which cannot be
registered in India;
(a) those which are not original; or (b) those which
have been commercially exploited anywhere in India
or in a convention country78, or (c) those which are
not inherently distinctive; or (d) those which are not
inherently capable of being distinguishable from any
other registered layout-design.
9. Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout
Design Act, 2000
78. Per Section 7: A layout design which has been commercially exploited for not more than two years from the date on which an application for its
registration has been filed either in India or a convention country shall be treated as not having been commercially exploited for the purposes of this
Act.
III. Procedure for Registration of Layout Designs
FILE APPLICATION WITH THE SEMICONDUCTOR INTEGRATED CIRCUITS LAYOUT DESIGN REGISTRY
AFTER ACCEPTANCE, THE APPLICATION IS ADVERTISED FOR OPPOSITION
IF AFTER PUBLICATION THE APPLICATION HAS NOT BEEN OPPOSED AND THE OPPOSITION PERIOD (3 MONTHS
EXTENDABLE FOR 1 MONTH THEREAFTER) HAS EXPIRED, THEN REGISTRATION IS GRANTED. THE DATE OF REGISTRATION
IS THE DATE ON WHICH THE APPLICATION IS FILED
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
35
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
IV. What are the Rights Granted
to the Registered Proprietor?
Registration provides the registered proprietor the
exclusive right to use the layout design and provides
protection against infringement.
V. What is the Term of
Registration?
The term of registration is for a period of ten years
from the date of filing an application for registration
or from the date of its first commercial exploitation
anywhere in India or in any country, whichever is
earlier.
VI. Infringement of Layout
Designs
Reproducing, importing, selling, or distributing for
commercial purposes a registered layout design or
a semiconductor IC incorporating such a design
constitutes infringement. However, if reproduction
of the layout design is for purposes of scientific
evaluation, analysis, research or teaching, this shall
not constitute infringement.
VII. Penalty for Infringement
Any person found to be infringing a registered layout
design can be punished by way of imprisonment for
a maximum of three years and/or a fine (minimum
INR 50,000 and maximum INR 1,000,000).
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
36
This Act was enacted to give effect to Article 27.3(b)79
of the TRIPs Agreement relating to protection of
plant varieties. India opted to protect them under a
sui generis system and passed the Act.
The Act includes:
￭ Protection of varieties developed through public
and private sector research;
￭ Protection of varieties developed and conserved by
farmers and traditional communities, providing
them with legal rights to save, use, sow, resow,
exchange, share, or sell their farm seed, although
farmer shall not be entitled to sell branded seed of
a variety protected under this Act ;
￭ Encouraging plant breeders and researchers to
develop new and improved varieties;
￭ Establishment of the Protection of Plant Varieties
and Farmers’ Rights Authority (“PPV&FRA”) for
the registration of new varieties and determine
claims of benefit sharing to such varieties;
￭ Provision of civil and criminal relief for
infringement and passing off of protected plant
varieties.
￭ Provisions for granting compulsory licenses
when reasonable requirements of the public have
not been satisfied.
The Act strikes a balance between the rights of
farmers and breeders by rewarding the farmers/local
communities from the pool of National Gene Fund
for their conservation and development efforts and,
at the same time, ensuring reward for innovation by
granting plant breeders’ rights.
I. Varieties Registerable under
the Act
The following are registerable under the Act:80
i. a new variety if it confirms the criteria of novelty,
distinctiveness, uniformity and stability; and
ii. an extant variety if it confirms the criteria of
novelty, distinctiveness, uniformity and stability
as specified under Protection of Plant Varieties
and Farmers’ Rights Regulations, 2006.
‘Extant Variety’ has been defined under the Act to
mean:81
i. a variety notified under Section 5 of the Seeds
Act, 1966; or
ii. a farmer’s variety (which has been defined to
mean a variety traditionally cultivated and
evolved by the framers in their fields or a
variety which is relative or land race of a variety
about which the farmers possess common
knowledge);82 or
iii. a variety about which there is common
knowledge; or
iv. any other variety which is in public domain
II. Term of Protection
As prescribed under Section 24 of the Act, the total
period of validity of registration shall not exceed:
i. eighteen years, in case of trees and vines;
ii. fifteen years, in case of extant varieties; and
iii. fifteen years, in any other case.
The certificate of registration issued under this Act
is valid for nine years in case of trees and vines and
six years in case of other crops and a registrant is
required to renew the same for the remaining period
of registration.
III. Setting up of PPV & FRA
The PPV&FRA was set up in November, 2005 for
registration of new varieties and determine claims
of benefit sharing to such varieties. The Authority
is located in New Delhi. This Authority has already
evolved the detailed rules and regulations and crop10. The Protection of Plant and Varieties and
Farmers Rights Act, 2001
79. Article 27.3(b) of TRIPs requires member countries to either grant patent protection plant varieties or to protect them under a sui generis system.
80. Section 14 of the Act
81. Section 2(1)(j) of the Act
82. Section 2(1)(l) of the Act.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
37
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
specific guidelines for seeking this protection. A
National Plant Variety Registry has been set up by
PPV&FR under the Union ministry of agriculture to
register crop varieties.
IV. Registration of Plant Varieties
now Possible in India
The Act has started documentation and registration
of varieties of 12 crops which include the following:
rice, wheat (bread wheat types), maize, sorghum
(jowar), pearl millet (bajra), chickpea (chana), pigeon
pea (arhar), green gram (mung), blackgram (urad),
lentil (masur), field pea (matar) and kidney bean
(rajmah).
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
38
India is a member of the Convention on Biological
Diversity (“CBD”). To comply with its obligation
under the CBD, this Act has been enacted. This
Act aims to ensure the conservation of biological
diversity in India, sustainable use of its components
and fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising
out of the use of biological resources. “Biological
diversity” means the variability among living
organisms from all sources and the ecological
complexes of which they are part, and includes
diversity within species or between species of
eco-systems. “Biological resources” means plants,
animals and micro-organisms or parts thereof, their
genetic material and by-products (excluding value
added products) with actual or potential use or value,
but does not include human genetic material.
Only selective provisions of the Biodiversity Act,
2002 – namely, definition provisions, provisions
relating to the constitution of the National
Biodiversity Authority (“NBA”) and rule-making
powers of Government – have been brought into
force with effect from October 1, 2003. NBA regulates
the commercial / other uses of biodiversity by both
Indian and non-Indian entities. Prior to seeking any
form of IPR in respect of biological resources, the
applicant will be required to obtain approval of the
NBA.
The Act confers extensive powers on the NBA with
regard to protection of biological resources. The
NBA will consist of a chairperson, seven ex-officio
members representing ministries and departments
of the Federal Government, and five non-official
members who are specialists, scientists and
representatives from the industry. The ex-officio
members include representatives from the tribal
affairs ministry, biotechnology, ocean development,
the Indian systems of medicine and homeopathy,
and the ministries of environment and agriculture.
Some of the salient provisions of the Act are as
follows:
￭ All foreign individuals, associations and
organizations would be required to seek the prior
approval of the NBA to access any biological
resource or the results of research occurring in
India, for any use. The NBA’s approval would also
have to be obtained before biological resources
can be exported out of India. Proposals have
been made to set up biodiversity funds and
management committees at national, state, and
municipal levels.
￭ All Indian citizens would have to seek the NBA’s
prior approval to transfer the results of research
relating to any biological resource to foreigners.
The term “foreigners” has been defined as
“individuals who are not Indian citizens”.
￭ Indian citizens, including local people and
communities, vaids and hakims (native Indian
doctors) will have free access to biological
resources for use within the country for any
purpose. However, the NBA’s prior approval
would be required before seeking any form of IPR
on an invention based on a biological resource.
￭ The NBA will have the power to impose
conditions to ensure a share in the benefits
accruing from the acquisition of IPRs.
11. The Biological Diversity Act, 2002
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
39
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
Confidential information and trade secrets are
protected under the common law and there are
no statutes that specifically govern the protection
of the same. In order to protect trade secrets and
confidential information, watertight agreements
should be agreed upon, and they should be supported
by sound policies and procedures.
I. Protection of Confidential
Information in the Hands of
Employees
In this information age, it’s imperative that
a business protects its new formula, product,
technology, customer lists, or future business plans.
In the global marketplace, Indian corporations are
often required to comply with foreign laws and are
likely to be exposed to liabilities for violation of
confidential information or trade secrets of their
business partners or third parties. For example, the
U.S. Economic Espionage Act, 1996 imposes criminal
liability (including fines and prison sentences) on
any person who intentionally or knowingly steals
a trade secret, knowingly receives, or purchases a
wrongfully obtained trade secret. The standards for
protection have to be tailored to address the risks
associated with rapid advancement in technology
and communications. The standards accepted today
may become inadequate tomorrow. However, one
constant factor is the presence of a corporate culture
imbued with information protection values.
The employees of an organization are privy to
confidential information and trade secrets on a daily
basis. In the absence of any specific Indian statute
conferring protection on such information in the
hands of employees, recourse has to be taken to
common law rights and contractual obligations.
II. Non-Disclosure Agreements
Sound and concise company policies and nondisclosure agreements with the employees
protecting confidential information and trade secrets
are recommended so as to provide contractual
remedy in addition to the one under the common
law. Such agreements should define “confidential
information” and the exceptions to confidentiality.
Agreements should have clauses negating a grant of
an implied license, restrictions on disclosure, use and
copy; restriction on use of confidential information
upon termination of the employment, return of
information upon termination and right to withhold
salary and emoluments till such return.
Non-compete clauses, depending upon their
applicability in the Indian context, read with the
confidentiality clauses would afford an organization
added protection with respect to its confidential
information. Such provisions must have a clear
purpose, which is to restrict the use of confidential
information and trade secrets obtained during
employment and ensure that employees do not
compete unfairly. However, non-compete provisions
would need to be reasonable, and the Indian courts
may treat a tough non-compete provision as
unenforceable.
In order to ensure that the rights of third parties
are not violated, the non-disclosure/employment
agreement should clearly impose an obligation on
the employee not to integrate into the organization’s
data or intellectual property, any confidential
information of a third party. Employees should
be required to indemnify the organization in case
of violation of this clause. If the organization
has not executed such agreements at the time of
employment, subsequently executed agreements
should expressly cover the confidential information
obtained by the employee from the date of his
employment.
III. Internal Processes
Strong internal controls and processes to protect
confidential information should be in place.
Employees should be educated to identify
information that is confidential or in the nature of
a trade secret, to enable them to make an informed
decision. They should have a clear understanding of
their responsibilities to protect confidential matter
and treat this as an on-going process that is integral
to their work. Data that is confidential should be
clearly indicated as such in all communications.
Appropriate security procedures must be established
and followed by the company and access to specific
sensitive areas of workplace restricted or limited to
certain senior employees only.
Third-party interaction and disclosures should
be channeled only through specified personnel.
12. Confidential Information & Trade Secrets
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
40
Wherever feasible, confidential information should
only be shared with those employees who have a
legitimate need to know such information, thus
enabling the employees to perform the assigned
tasks.
IV. An Exit-Interview
During such an interview, an employee should
be reminded of his obligations with respect to the
company’s confidential information and trade secrets
and should be asked to sign a document reaffirming
his obligations. If an employment agreement
was signed, the document to be signed upon
termination should be attached. A copy of the signed
exit-interview form, including the employment
agreement, must be given to the employee. Such an
interview not only serves as a meaningful reminder
but can also be valuable evidence of employee’s
knowledge of such obligations.
Success of suits for protection of confidential
information and trade secrets depends upon
production of satisfactory evidence to prove
confidentiality of the information, act of disclosure
and the damages caused thereby, as well as the
reasonability of such restriction.
Enactment of a strong statute for protection of
confidential information and trade secrets would
certainly help the Indian industry. In any event,
strategies for protection of the organization’s
confidential information and trade secrets have, in
today’s economic scenario, become a prerequisite to
the organization’s survival.
Confidential Information & Trade Secrets
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
41
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
India is a signatory to the following international conventions:
Convention Date
Berne Convention April 1, 1928 (Party to convention)
Universal Copyright Convention January 7,1988 (Ratification)
Paris Convention December 7,1998 (Entry into force)
Convention on Biological Diversity June 5,1992 (Signature and ratification)
Patent Cooperation Treaty December 7,1998 (Entry into force)
Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of
Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure 1977
December 17, 2001(Party to treaty)
13. International Conventions
By virtue of such membership, convention
applications for the registration of trademarks,
patents, and designs are accepted with the priority
date claim; copyright infringement suits can be
instituted in India based on copyright created in the
convention countries.
The Madrid Protocol
The Madrid System, administered by the
International Bureau of World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO), Geneva, permits the filing,
registration and maintenance of trademark
rights in more than one jurisdiction on a global
basis. This system comprises two treaties; the
Madrid Agreement concerning the International
Registration of Marks, which was concluded in
1891 and came into force in 1892, and the Protocol
relating to the Madrid Agreement, which came
into operation on April 1, 1996. India acceded to
the relevant treaties in 2005 and in 2007.The new
Trademarks (Amendment) Bill to amend the TM Act
was introduced in the Parliament to implement the
Madrid System in India in 2009. The Trade Marks
(Amendment) Rules 2013, with provisions relating
to the international registration of trademarks under
the Madrid Protocol, came into force in India from
8th July, 2013.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
42
Effective September 15, 2003, the Intellectual
Property Appellate Board (Board) has been set up
in Chennai (in the state of Tamil Nadu, India) with
benches in Ahmedabad, Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata.
The Board has the jurisdiction to consider appeals
from the decisions of the Registrar of Trade Marks
and Registrar of GI and to consider cancellation /
rectification cases of trademarks and GIs. The cases,
which were pending before various High Courts
with respect to the aforementioned matters stand
transferred to the Board with effect from October 6,
2003. Setting up of the exclusive IP Board is expected
to lead to an effective and speedy disposal of cases.
The cases with respect to infringement and passing
off will continue to be instituted in regular courts.
14. Special Tribunals
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
43
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
Income tax in India is governed by the provisions of
the Income-tax Act, 1961 (“ITA”), which lays down
elaborate provisions in respect of chargeability
to tax, determination of residency, computation
of income, transfer pricing, etc. All residents are
subject to tax in India on their worldwide income,
whereas non-residents are taxed only on Indian
source income, i.e. income that is received in India
or accrues or arises to them in India or is deemed to
accrue or arise or is deemed to be received in India.83
Every company that is chargeable to tax in India is
required to file a tax return in India.84
I. Residency85 and Scope of
Income
A company incorporated under the laws of India
is deemed to be a resident of India for Indian tax
purposes. A company incorporated outside India
is deemed to be resident in India if it is wholly
controlled and managed from India. Income of an
Indian company (which would include an Indian
subsidiary of a foreign company) is taxed in India at
the rate of 30%.86 A foreign company is taxed at the
rate of 40% on its business income earned in India,
only if it has a PE87 or business connection88 in India.
Section 90(2) of the ITA provides that where India
has entered into a tax treaty with the Government
of any other country for granting of relief of tax or
avoidance of double taxation, in relation to such
a tax payer to whom such tax treaty applies, the
provisions of the ITA would apply to the extent they
are more beneficial to the tax payer.
II.Deemed Indian Source
Incomes
Royalties and fees for technical services (“FTS”)
are taxable in India when they arise from sources
within India.89 Royalties and FTS paid by a resident
to a non-resident are generally taxable in India.
However, if such royalties/FTS are paid with respect
to a business or profession carried on by such
resident outside India or for earning income from
any source outside India, then such royalties and FTS
are not taxable in India. Further, even payments of
royalties or FTS made by one non-resident to another
non-resident are brought within the Indian tax net,
if such royalties/FTS are payable with respect to
any business or profession carried on by such nonresident in India or for earning any income from a
source in India.
Explanation 2 to section 9(1)(vi) and (vii) of ITA
defines the terms “royalty” and FTS respectively to
mean:
Royalty means consideration (including lump sum
consideration but excluding any consideration
which would be the income of the recipient
chargeable under the head “Capital Gains”) for:
i. “the transfer of all or any rights (including the
granting of a license) in respect of a patent,
invention, model, design, secret formula or
process or trademark or similar property; (It is
pertinent to note that the payment for transfer of
all or any rights in respect of any right, property
or information includes transfer of all or any
right for use or right to use a computer software
(including granting of a licence) irrespective
of the medium through which such right is
transferred.)
ii. the imparting of any information concerning
the working of, or the use of, a patent, invention,
model, design, secret formula or process or
trademark or similar property;
iii. the use of any patent, invention, model, design,
secret formula or process or trademark or similar
property;
iv. the imparting of any information concerning
technical, industrial, commercial or scientific
knowledge, experience or skill;
15. Tax Regime in India
83. Section 4 and 5 of the ITA.
84. Section 139(1) of the ITA.
85. Section 6 of the ITA.
86. The income tax rates mentioned in this paper are exclusive of the currently applicable surcharge at the rate of 5% and a 3% education cess on such
income tax and surcharge.
87. Permanent Establishment.
88. The term ‘business connection’ is a term, which is used in the ITA and is analogous to the term ‘PE’ used in tax treaties.
89. Section 9(1) (vi), (vii) of the ITA.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
44
iv-a. the use or right to use any industrial,
commercial or scientific equipment;
v. the transfer of all or any rights (including the
granting of a license) in respect of any copyright,
literary, artistic or scientific work including
films or video tapes for the use in connection
with television or tapes for the use in connection
with radio broadcasting, but not including
consideration for the sale, distribution or
exhibition of cinematograph films; or
vi. the rendering of any services in connection with
the activities referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (v).
With respect to the aforesaid definition of royalty
it is important to note that for the purposes of
determination of whether a payment for right,
property or information is in the nature of royalty
it is irrelevant whether the payer is in possession
or control of such right, property or information or
whether such right, property or information is used
directly by the payer. Further, the location of such
right, property or information is also not of essence.
“Fees for technical services” means any consideration
(including any lump sum consideration) for
the rendering of any managerial, technical or
consultancy services (including the provision of
services of technical or other personnel) but does
not include consideration for any construction,
assembly, mining or like project undertaken by the
recipient or consideration which would be income of
the recipient chargeable under the head “Salaries”.
Royalties and FTS, which are chargeable to tax in
India and are payable to non-residents who do not
have a PE in India, are subject to a withholding tax
at the rate 10% on gross basis.90 No deductions are
allowed from the gross royalties or FTS. This rate
may be reduced if there is a favorable provision
in the tax treaty between India and the country of
residence of the non-resident.
If the non-resident company having a PE in India
receives royalties/FTS, which is chargeable to tax
in India and the payment of such royalties/FTS is
effectively connected to the PE in India, then such
royalties/FTS would be liable to tax in India as
business income at the rate of 40% on net basis.91 In
such cases, expenditure incurred in this respect by
the non-resident in earning the royalties/FTS would
be allowable as a deduction.
India, does not have any special provisions for the
taxation of computer software. Thus, the general
rules of taxation of business income, FTS or royalties,
as the case may be, are applied. The Central Board
of Direct Taxes (“CBDT”) had constituted a High
Powered Committee (“HPC”) in the year 1999 to
advise the government with respect to any changes
that may be required in the domestic law to address
the taxation of electronic commerce. The HPC
while making its recommendations had taken a
different view on the taxation of 13 out of the 28
categories of e-commerce transactions examined by
the Technical Advisory Group (“TAG”) in its report
on ”Treaty Characterisation of Electronic Commerce
Payments” dated February 1, 2001. On account of
several representations made by the industry and
professionals,92 the recommendations of the HPC
have not yet been adopted.
III. Tax Incentives
Tax incentives are available to a company engaged
in the manufacture and export of goods and services
if the export is undertaken via a facility set up
in a Special Economic Zone. In such a case, a tax
exemption equivalent to 100% of the profits derived
by such unit from export of goods and services is
available for the first 5 years of its operations and
a 50% tax exemption on such profits is available
for subsequent five years. Subject to fulfillment of
specific conditions regarding creation of a reserve
and utilization of profits, a 50% tax exemption for an
additional 5 years may also be claimed.
Some of the other tax incentives available include
incentives for a company engaged in the business of
bio-technology or in any business of manufacture
or production (except certain specified businesses),
whereby such companies can claim a deduction
equivalent up to 200% of the expenditure incurred
for in-house R&D facilities (not being expense in the
nature of cost of land and building) that have been
approved by Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Ministry of Science and Technology, Govt.
of India. In other cases, a deduction shall be allowed
for any expenditure laid out on scientific research
related to the business carried out by the company is
allowed.
90. Section 115AA and 115BB respectively of the ITA.
91. Section 44 DA of the ITA
92. Our recommendations can be found at www.nishithdesai.com/eComTaxpert/ecomtaxpertnew.htm
Tax Regime in India
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
45
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
IV. Depreciation
Depreciation is allowed on intangible assets in the
nature of know-how, patents, copyrights, trade
names, licenses, franchises or any other business or
commercial rights of a similar nature acquired on or
after April 1, 1998 at the rate of 25% as per written
down value method. Computer software is entitled
to depreciation at a higher rate i.e. 60%.
V. Second tier Royalty
As discussed above, payments of royalties/FTS made
by one non-resident to another non-resident are
brought within the Indian tax net, if such royalties/
FTS are payable with respect to any business or
profession carried on by such non-resident in India
or for earning any income from any source in India.
Thus, for example if any royalties/FTS are payable
by a non-resident sub-licensor to a non-resident
licensor, the same could be subject to tax in India if
they are payable by the sub-licensor in respect of any
business or profession carried on by him in India or
for earning any income from any source in India.
However, under certain tax treaties, which India
has entered into, such second tier royalty/FTS can
be taxed in India only if the sub-licensor has a PE in
India and the royalties/FTS are borne by the PE.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
46
I. Place of Filing of Infringement
Actions
In India, infringement and passing-off actions can
be instituted by filing a suit in the appropriate court.
All IP laws state the appropriate court in which
such suits can be instituted. For example, under
the TM Act, suits for trademark infringement or
passing off can be filed in the district court within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the time
of the institution of the suit / other proceedings,
the plaintiff / one of the plaintiffs (for example,
registered proprietor, registered user) actually
and voluntarily resides or carries on business or
personally works for gain. Under the Copyright Act
there is a similar provision as well.
II. Interim Injunctions
In India, court cases often reach a final hearing after
twelve to sixteen years from the date of their filing.
Therefore, obtaining an interim injunction becomes
crucial for the plaintiffs, especially in intellectual
property lawsuits. The damages are awarded only
after the final hearing.
Indian courts also grant injunctions in a quia timet
(anticipatory) action if the plaintiff proves that
defendant’s activities or proposed activities would
lead to violation of plaintiffs’ rights.
III. Interim Relief
After filing the suit, the plaintiffs can seek ad interim
and interim relief, including injunctions, Mareva
Injunctions, an appointment of the commissioner
or the court receiver, Anton Piller orders, John
Doe (Ashok Kumar) orders, and other orders,
such as discovery and inspection, or orders for
interrogatories.
Ad-interim and interim injunctions are granted
under Order 39, Rules 1 and 2, read with Section 151
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.The Supreme
Court of India in Wander Ltd. v. Antox India (P)
Ltd.93 laid down the principles for the granting
of an interim injunction. For the grant of such ad
interim and interim orders, the plaintiff has to show
that he has a prima facie case, that the balance of
convenience is in his favor, and the hardship suffered
by the plaintiff would be greater if the order is not
granted. If the plaintiff is able to convince the Court
of these points, then plaintiff can obtain an ad
interim and interim injunction within a couple of
days of filing of the suit. Some courts also grant ex
parte injunctions if a strong case is made.
Generally, a plaintiff is required to give at least fortyeight hours notice to the defendant for a hearing of
the interim application. If the defendant appears
before the court, he may be granted further time to
file his reply and the plaintiff in turn may be allowed
to file his response to the defendant’s reply. The
hearing of the interim applications could go on for
three to four days, depending upon the complexity of
the matter. Both the parties have the liberty to file an
appeal from the interim order and subsequently the
parties may have to fight the matter even up to the
Supreme Court of India. The appellate court also has
the power to grant interim orders pending the final
hearing of appeal.
Indian courts have realized the importance of
protecting IP and have started granting innovative
orders. Recently, of India’s 40,000 cable operators,
only 3,500 had obtained licenses from the owners
of the rights to broadcast the World Cup (soccer)
in India. Given the transitory nature of both the
World Cup rights and the cable operators themselves
(and the normal time frame of the Indian courts),
the Delhi High Court granted an order against
anonymous defendants whereby the rights owner,
accompanied by a court-appointed commissioner,
were able to locate the unlicensed cable operators
and shut down the unauthorized World Cup
transmissions. Such orders are called Ashok Kumar
orders in India, equivalent to John Doe orders.
The damages are awarded only after the final hearing
of the suit, which could take twelve to sixteen years,
as stated earlier. Traditionally Indian courts have
been slow and conservative in granting damages in
intellectual property matters. However, recently the
courts have started granting punitive and exemplary
damages in the intellectual property law matters. In
the matter of Time Incorporated v. Lokesh Srivastava
and Anr.94 the Delhi Court observed:
16. Enforcement
93. (1990) Supp. S.C.C. 727.
94. 2005 (3) PTC 3 (Del)
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
47
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
“This Court has no hesitation in saying that the
time has come when the Courts dealing actions for
infringement of trademarks, copy rights, patents
etc. should not only grant compensatory damages
but award punitive damages also with a view to
discourage and dishearten law breakers who indulge
in violations with impunity out of lust for money
so that they realize that in case they are caught, they
would be liable not only to reimburse the aggrieved
party but would be liable to pay punitive damages
also, which may spell financial disaster for them.”
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
48
In its circular dated October 29, 2007 (“Circular”),
the Central Board of Excise & Customs under
the Ministry of Finance, issued instructions to
the relevant customs and excise authorities, for
implementation of the Intellectual Property Rights
(Imported Goods) Enforcement Rules, 2007 (“IPR
Rules”) dated May 8, 2007. The IPR Rules emanate
from Section 11 of the Customs Act, 1952 which
empowers the Central Government to prohibit
import or export of goods infringing intellectual
property rights. Before the notification of the IPR
Rules, the notification of January 18, 1964, prohibited
import of goods infringing trademarks and design.
The IPR Rules prohibit import of goods infringing
patent, copyright and geographical indications as
well.
I. Features of the IPR Rules
The Circular contemplates to implement a
centralized web-enabled registration system. The
Circular emphasizes that under the IPR Rules, the
determination of whether the goods are infringing
or not would be in accordance with the applicable
IP legislation. For smooth implementation of the
IPR regime, the Circular stipulates establishment
of an IPR Cell in each Custom House. The IPR Cell
is vested with the responsibility of verifying the
applications, completing web-enabled registration
formalities and making correspondence with the
Risk Management Division and other Customs
formations. Further, any import involving suspected
infringement of IPRs would be handled by the IPR
Cell. Any instance of suo-moto interdiction of the
import consignments by the Customs, involving
possible infringements, would also be referred
to such IPR Cell. In view of the fact that these
proceedings might require the customs to determine
right in personam, participation of the rights holder
is made mandatory. The qualification and training
imparted to the members of the IPR Cell will play a
crucial role in effective implementation of the IPR
Rules. Abstention on the part of the right holder
would result in discontinuation of the proceedings
and release of the goods.
The other principle features of the IPR Rules are
summarized below:
￭ adequate protection to the rightful importer;
￭ adequate protection to the Customs for bona fide
act;
￭ suo-moto action by the Customs in specified
circumstances;
￭ disposal of the confiscated goods;
￭ no action against goods of non commercial
nature contained in personal baggage or sent in
small consignments intended for personal use of
the importer.
II. Procedure for Procuring
Registration under the IPR
Rules
The IPR Rules read with the Circular lay down
a detailed procedure to be followed by the right
holders as also by the Customs authorities for
seeking suspension or release of infringing goods.
￭ A right holder would have to give a notice for
registration requesting the Customs Department
to suspend clearance of infringing goods at the
port of such goods. Such notices can be filed
online.
￭ The information submitted by the right holder is
required to be cross verified by the Customs from
the concerned authorities with whom the rights
are registered in accordance with the parent IP
enactments.
￭ If the information is found to be wrong or false,
then registration accorded to the rights holder
may be cancelled. Further, an amendment to
the registration would require the rights holder
to undergo the entire process of registration
as if it were a fresh application. In relation
to a particular goods there are separate IP
registrations, then a separate registration is
required to be done for each type of IP.
￭ Upon satisfaction by the authorities, the notice
may be rejected or registered for a minimum
period of five years (or less if so requested by the
rights holder).
17. Measures to Check Import of Infringing
Goods
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
49
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
￭ There are certain conditions as to the provision
of bond, surety and security that the rights
holder needs to satisfy. This is primarily to avoid
frivolous registrations. The bond amount is equal
to 110% of the value of goods while the security
deposit is 25% of the bond value.
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
50
The importance of IPR and their protection is
acknowledged the world over as essential to
business. In tune with the world scenario, India too
has recognized the value of IP, which recognition
has been consistently upheld by legislators, courts
and the industry. India is now a signatory to various
IP treaties and conventions. This has helped India
become more attuned to the world’s approaches and
attitudes towards IP protection. India has already
taken steps to comply with its obligations under
TRIPS, and the Indian IP law regime is almost at
par with the regimes of many developed nations.
Historically, the enforcement of IPRs in India was
not particularly effective. However, recent judicial
rulings and steps taken by various enforcement
agencies demonstrate that India is gearing up for
effective protection and enforcement of IPRs. The
Indian police has established special IP cells where
specially trained police officers have been appointed
to monitor IP infringement and cyber crimes.
Various Indian industries have also become more
proactive in protecting their IPRs. For example,
the Indian Music Industry, an association of music
companies, which headed by a retired senior police
official, has taken similar proactive steps to combat
music piracy. All in all, India has taken many
positive steps toward improving its IPR regime and
is expected to do much more in the coming years to
streamline itself with the best practices in the field of
intellectual property rights.
Conclusion
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Provided upon request only
The following research papers and much more are available on our Knowledge Site: www.nishithdesai.com
NDA Insights
TITLE TYPE DATE
Thomas Cook – Sterling Holiday Buyout M&A Lab December 2014
Reliance tunes into Network18! M&A Lab December 2014
Sun Pharma –Ranbaxy, A Panacea for Ranbaxy’s ills? M&A Lab December 2014
Jet Etihad Jet Gets a Co-Pilot M&A Lab May 2014
Apollo’s Bumpy Ride in Pursuit of Cooper M&A Lab May 2014
Diageo-USL- ‘King of Good Times; Hands over Crown Jewel to Diageo M&A Lab May 2014
Copyright Amendment Bill 2012 receives Indian Parliament’s assent IP Lab September 2013
Public M&A’s in India: Takeover Code Dissected M&A Lab August 2013
File Foreign Application Prosecution History With Indian Patent Office IP Lab April 2013
Warburg - Future Capital - Deal Dissected M&A Lab January 2013
Real Financing - Onshore and Offshore Debt Funding Realty in India Realty Check May 2012
Pharma Patent Case Study IP Lab March 2012
Patni plays to iGate’s tunes M&A Lab January 2012
Vedanta Acquires Control Over Cairn India M&A Lab January 2012
Corporate Citizenry in the face of Corruption Yes, Governance
Matters!
September 2011
Funding Real Estate Projects - Exit Challenges Realty Check April 2011
Joint-Ventures in
India
November 2014
The Curious Case of
the Indian Gaming
Laws
September 2015
Fund Structuring
and Operations
June 2015
Private Equity
and Private Debt
Investments in
India
June 2015
E-Commerce in
India
July 2015
Corporate Social
Responsibility &
Social Business
Models in India
March 2015
Doing Business in
India
June 2015
Convergence:
Internet of Things
July 2015
Outbound
Acquisitions by
India-Inc
September 2014
© Nishith Desai Associates 2015
Intellectual Property Law in India
Legal, Regulatory & Tax
Research is the DNA of NDA. In early 1980s, our firm emerged from an extensive, and then pioneering, research
by Nishith M. Desai on the taxation of cross-border transactions. The research book written by him provided the
foundation for our international tax practice. Since then, we have relied upon research to be the cornerstone of
our practice development. Today, research is fully ingrained in the firm’s culture.
Research has offered us the way to create thought leadership in various areas of law and public policy. Through
research, we discover new thinking, approaches, skills, reflections on jurisprudence, and ultimately deliver
superior value to our clients.
Over the years, we have produced some outstanding research papers, reports and articles. Almost on a daily
basis, we analyze and offer our perspective on latest legal developments through our “Hotlines”. These Hotlines
provide immediate awareness and quick reference, and have been eagerly received. We also provide expanded
commentary on issues through detailed articles for publication in newspapers and periodicals for dissemination
to wider audience. Our NDA Insights dissect and analyze a published, distinctive legal transaction using multiple
lenses and offer various perspectives, including some even overlooked by the executors of the transaction. We
regularly write extensive research papers and disseminate them through our website. Although we invest heavily
in terms of associates’ time and expenses in our research activities, we are happy to provide unlimited access to
our research to our clients and the community for greater good.
Our research has also contributed to public policy discourse, helped state and central governments in drafting
statutes, and provided regulators with a much needed comparative base for rule making. Our ThinkTank
discourses on Taxation of eCommerce, Arbitration, and Direct Tax Code have been widely acknowledged.
As we continue to grow through our research-based approach, we are now in the second phase of establishing a
four-acre, state-of-the-art research center, just a 45-minute ferry ride from Mumbai but in the middle of verdant
hills of reclusive Alibaug-Raigadh district. The center will become the hub for research activities involving
our own associates as well as legal and tax researchers from world over. It will also provide the platform to
internationally renowned professionals to share their expertise and experience with our associates and select
clients.
We would love to hear from you about any suggestions you may have on our research reports. Please feel free to
contact us at
research@nishithdesai.com
Research @ NDA
Intellectual Property Law in India
© Copyright 2015 Nishith Desai Associates www.nishithdesai.com
MUMBAI
93 B, Mittal Court,Nariman Point,
Mumbai 400 021 India
Tel: +91 - 22 - 6669 5000
Fax: +91 - 22 - 6669 5001
SINGAPORE
Level 30,Six Battery Road,
Singapore 049909
Tel: +65 - 6550 9855
Fax: +65 - 6550 9856
MUNICH
Maximilianstraße 13
80539 Munich, Germany
Tel: +49 - 89 - 203006 - 268
Fax: +49 - 89 - 203006 - 450
BANGALORE
Prestige Loka, G01, 7/1 Brunton Rd,
Bangalore 560 025, India
Tel: +91 - 80 - 6693 5000
Fax: +91 - 80 - 6693 5001
NEW DELHI
C-5, Defence Colony
New Delhi - 110024, India
Tel: +91 - 11 - 4906 5000
Fax: +91 - 11- 4906 5001
SILICON VALLEY
220 S California Ave., Suite 201,
Palo Alto, CA 94306, USA
Tel: +1 - 650 - 325 7100
Fax: +1 - 650 - 325 7300
MUMBAI BKC
3, North Avenue, Maker Maxity
Bandra – Kurla Complex,
Mumbai 400 051, India
Tel: +91 - 22 - 6159 5000
Fax: +91 - 22 - 6159 5001